17 of 33 
FILED ON: 8/9/2023 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4055 
 
 
OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR 
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 
STATE HOUSE · BOSTON, MA 02133 
(617) 725-4000 
 
MAURA T. HEALEY 
GOVERNOR 
 KIMBERLEY DRISCOLL 
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
ATTACHMENT C 
August 9, 2023 
 
To the Honorable Senate and House of Representatives, 
 
 Pursuant to Article LVI, as amended by Article XC, Section 3 of the Amendments to the 
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, I am returning to you for amendment 
Sections 8 and 101 of House Bill No. 4040, “An Act Making Appropriations for the Fiscal Year 
2024 for the Maintenance of the Departments, Boards, Commissions, Institutions and Certain 
Activities of the Commonwealth, for Interest, Sinking Fund and Serial Bond Requirements and 
for Certain Permanent Improvements.” 
 Section 8 requires the Highway Division of the Massachusetts Department of 
Transportation (MassDOT) to establish a new department and a new licensure process to oversee 
quarries producing concrete aggregate. The provision also expands concrete testing lab services 
to residential and private entities. Section 101 provides an effective date of December 31, 2023 
and requires MassDOT to promulgate regulations by that same date. 
 I fully support this proposal as it addresses a challenge faced by many homeowners and 
communities in the Commonwealth. Concrete contaminated with pyrite and pyrrhotite can 
weaken construction, drastically reducing the strength and limiting the lifespan of buildings and 
infrastructure, and resulting in significant financial harm to unassuming homeowners, 
municipalities, and the Commonwealth. As we work to replenish our housing supply, we must 
ensure that construction is completed with quality materials. 
 Establishing an efficient and meaningful licensing program will require time. 
MassDOT will need more than five months to establish a new department, recruit and retain 
necessary personnel, promulgate regulations, and develop a new licensure process. Delaying the 
effective date of this proposal to July 1, 2024 will allow MassDOT to complete these actions in 
an orderly way and effectively achieve the aims of the new law. 

18 of 33 
 For these reasons, I recommend that the bill be amended by striking out sections 8 and 
101 and inserting in place thereof the following 2 sections:- 
 SECTION 8. Chapter 6C of the General Laws is hereby amended by adding the 
following section:- 
 Section 79. (a) For the purposes of this section, the following words shall, unless the 
context clearly requires otherwise, have the following meanings: 
 “Aggregate”, granular materials such as gravel, sand and crushed rock that may be used 
individually or are combined for a particular purpose. 
 “Certified professional geologist”, a professional geologist certified by the American 
Institute of Professional Geologists. 
 “Concrete aggregate”, natural sand, natural gravel or crushed aggregate products 
produced from ledge rock. 
 “Licensed professional geologist”, a professional geologist certified by: (i) examination 
through the National Association of State Boards of Geology; or (ii) a state’s licensing authority 
that follows the national standards of the National Association of State Boards of Geology’s 
licensing program or its equivalent. 
 (b) Any person seeking to mine, expand, excavate or otherwise operate a quarry, sand 
and gravel operation or any other aggregate source for the purpose of producing concrete 
aggregate for sale or use in foundations, structural elements or infrastructure, including, but not 
limited to, roadways and bridges, shall submit to the department and the state geologist an 
application for a license to conduct such activity. 
 Each license application shall consist of: (i) a description of the geographic location of 
the aggregate source; (ii) an operations plan, including, but not limited to, mining, processing, 
storage and quality control methods; (iii) a geological source report, consistent with subsection 
(c); and (iv) the results of aggregate testing for the presence of pyrite and pyrrhotite, consistent 
with subsection (d). Each license application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the 
department. Fees received by the department under this section shall be used to implement this 
section; provided, however, that any surplus fee receipts shall be deposited into the General 
Fund. 
 (c) An applicant under this section shall prepare a geological source report as required 
under subsection (b). Such report shall be prepared by a certified professional geologist, licensed 
professional geologist or an equivalent acceptable to the state geologist in a form and manner 
prescribed by the department, developed in consultation with the state geologist, a representative 
nominated by the Massachusetts Aggregate & Asphalt Pavement Association, Inc. and a 
representative nominated by the Massachusetts Concrete & Aggregate Producers Association, 
19 of 33 
Inc., and shall include, but shall not be limited to: (i) a description of the characteristics of the 
aggregate to be excavated at the aggregate source location; (ii) a description of the products to be 
produced at such location; and (iii) a copy of the results of an inspection of face material and 
geologic log analysis, which shall be conducted not more than 60 days prior to the date of the 
report. A geological source report prepared under this subsection shall be valid for a period of 1 
year from the date of preparation. 
 (d) Aggregate testing to identify the presence of pyrite and pyrrhotite required under 
subsection (b) shall include, but shall not be limited to, a total sulfur test to measure total sulfur 
content in a representative sample. Aggregate testing shall be performed by an accredited 
laboratory in accordance with applicable standards established by American Society of Testing 
and Materials International or alternate standards to be determined by the department in 
consultation with the state geologist. 
 (e) The secretary or a designee, in consultation with the state geologist, shall review each 
license application submitted pursuant to this section and notify each applicant whether the 
license has been approved and any applicable conditions of operation. If the application is 
denied, the notification shall include the reason for denial. A license granted under this section 
shall be valid for 1 year from the date of approval; provided, however, that a license may be 
renewed after it expires. The department shall state the aggregate testing requirements 
established under subsection (d) in the license application; provided, however, that the state 
geologist may request additional testing or information during the review of a license 
application. The department may modify testing requirements and application criteria at its 
discretion. 
 The department may issue a license valid for more than 1 year to an applicant that has 
submitted geological source reports and been approved for a license for 5 consecutive years; 
provided, however, that the licensee shall be required to submit annual geologic source reports as 
a condition for receiving such license. 
 (f) A person owning or operating an aggregate source, subject to licensure pursuant to 
this section, shall maintain all records relevant to such licensure and operation, including, but not 
limited to, a record of sale for all aggregate, for not less than 30 years. 
 (g) A person owning or operating a concrete production facility for the purpose of 
producing concrete for sale or use in foundations, structural elements or infrastructure, including, 
but not limited to, roadways and bridges, and who is in receipt of aggregate material from a 
source licensed pursuant to this section, shall maintain a record of the aggregate used in 
individual concrete batches for not less than 30 years. 
 (h) The department, in consultation with the state geologist, shall maintain all data 
collected under this section. 
20 of 33 
 (i) Nothing in this section shall affect the operations of quarries producing aggregate for 
purposes other than those described in subsection (b). 
 (j) The department, in consultation with the state geologist, shall promulgate regulations 
to implement this section. 
 SECTION 101. Section 79 of chapter 6C of the General Laws, inserted by section 8, shall 
take effect on July 1, 2024; provided, however, that entities licensed to operate a quarry or sand 
and gravel operation in the commonwealth before the effective date of this act that are affected 
by said section 79 of said chapter 6C shall meet the requirements of said section 79 of said 
chapter 6C not later than July 1, 2024; and provided further, that any work conducted by such an 
entity prior to July 1, 2024 shall comply with existing regulations. 
 Respectfully submitted, 
 
 Maura T. Healey, 
 Governor
