1 of 3 
HOUSE DOCKET, NO. 4781 FILED ON: 1/9/2024 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4242 
 
 
OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR 
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS 
STATE HOUSE · BOSTON, MA 02133 
(617) 725-4000 
 
MAURA T. HEALEY 
GOVERNOR 
 KIMBERLEY DRISCOLL 
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR 
 
January 9, 2024 
 
To the Honorable Senate and House of Representatives, 
 
 I am pleased to submit for your consideration an Act to Provide for the Future 
Information Technology needs of Massachusetts, also referred to as “The FutureTech Act of 
2024” to fund critical information technology capital needs. 
 The Commonwealth’s current Information Technology bond authorization is expected to 
be exhausted in Fiscal Year 2025, just as we approach the crossroads of multiple large, 
transformative projects that will harden our cybersecurity posture, support IT capital efficiencies 
at the secretariat and agency levels, greatly enhance the digital user experience to bring state 
government information and services to our residents, and contemplate the future of AI-
augmented service provision. In light of this expected need for new authorization, the Executive 
Office of Technology Services and Security (EOTSS) Office of Capital Planning, in coordination 
with the Executive Office for Administration and Finance (A&F), undertook an assessment of 
the executive branch IT capital project needs over the next five years. This bill is the result of 
this thorough, collaborative process. . 
 The legislation I propose today will provide $1.23 billion in capital bond authorization to 
support current and future technology needs over the next five years, in addition to $400 million 
in authorization to spend anticipated future federal funding for major Health and Human 
Services business application projects. Details on some of the bill’s key initiatives are listed 
below. 
 Investing in Government Efficiency 
 • $120 million to support the Business Enterprise Systems Transformation (BEST) 
within the Office of the Comptroller to implement business process improvements, streamline 

2 of 3 
state administrative workflow, and offer agencies the technology, training, and tools to access 
required data and meet daily business needs on a real-time basis. 
 • $110 million to support the Commonwealth Digital Roadmap, which seeks to 
standardize the user experience across state agencies with a single identity that proactively points 
users to relevant information and services. To date, the Identity Access Management (IAM) 
single sign-on has amassed over 1 million users around the state. Building out this platform to 
add more applications and launching new lines of constituent communication through live chat, 
SMS and chatbot services will promote increased adoption and interoperability of the platform: 
as it scales it becomes more useful to users. 
 • $30 million to modernize medical health records hosted by the Executive Office 
of Health and Human Services to facilitate more efficient, secure health record management. 
 • $15 million to support the Integrated Digital Data Services (IDDS) project within 
the Executive Office of Education (EOE). This project moves EOE data that it currently holds in 
many different places onto cloud services, and creates a secure, standardized platform that 
provides more timely and useful educational information to educators, administrators, and the 
public. 
 Investing in Service Access and Equity 
 • $52 million to support the continued rollout of the Employment Modernization 
Transformation (EMT), a project which, when complete, will provide both employers and those 
seeking unemployment insurance with a new portal to conduct state-facing employment 
activities, and facilitate a streamlined claims process for uploading information with a mobile-
friendly design and increased accessibility features, making it easier to apply for unemployment 
assistance. 
 • $13 million to support the Enhanced Student Financial Aid Access project, which 
will simplify the financial aid discovery and application process, enhance accessibility, and 
facilitate higher college-going rates for Massachusetts residents, ensuring the Commonwealth 
fulfills the vision for having one of the most equitable and effective higher education systems in 
the nation. 
 • $12 million to support the Child Care Financial Assistance (CCFA) 
Modernization project, which will update the business processes within CCFA to align with an 
updated user experience and replace or update the core technology systems managing the 
waitlist, application and eligibility determination, and payments. Updating the overall user 
experience will reduce barriers to families seeking assistance from the Commonwealth, ease 
administrative burdens on child care providers, and create greater operational efficiencies for the 
Department of Early Education and Care 
 • $10 million to support the Integrated Eligibility and Enrollment program within 
the Executive Office of Health and Human Services (HHS). This program eliminates duplicative 
3 of 3 
documentation while streamlining the application and onboarding processes for benefits 
administered by HHS while making residents aware of overlapping eligibility for services. 
 Supporting Municipalities 
 • $30 million to support the Municipal Fiber Grant Program, a competitive grant 
program that supports the closing of critical gaps that exist in municipal networks. Focused on 
connecting municipality-owned facilities, the program assists municipalities in achieving many 
critical goals associated with municipal fiber networks. 
 • $25 million for the Community Compact IT Grant Program, a competitive grant 
program aimed at driving innovation at the local level available to any municipality that is part of 
Community Compact Cabinet Initiative. The program supports the implementation of technology 
projects that harness the power of IT to drive innovation, make government more efficient, save 
taxpayer money, and make it easier for residents to interact and transact with their local 
government.   
 Pioneering in Emerging Tech and Artificial Intelligence 
 • $25 million to support future AI projects that align with the Healey-Driscoll 
Administration’s priorities. 
 Investing in Public Safety 
 • $5 million to fund the DOC Radio Modernization initiative which will upgrade 
the utility and security of communications technologies within the Department of Correction. 
 • $3 million to fund the Criminal Justice360 cross-tracking system and dashboard, 
empowering members of the public to view aggregated records from the Massachusetts 
Department of Correction (DOC) and the Commonwealth’s fourteen County Sheriff’s Offices. 
 The FutureTech Act will strengthen the Commonwealth by ensuring that our executive 
agencies and secretariats have the IT assets they need to deliver exceptional constituent services 
and conduct business on behalf of the state in the most efficient, secure and transparent manner. I 
urge you to enact this legislation as soon as possible to avoid the interruption of important 
projects that can be completed for the benefit of the residents of the Commonwealth. 
 Respectfully submitted, 
 
 Maura T. Healey, 
 
 
 Governor

1 of 7 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4242 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________ 
In the One Hundred and Ninety-Third General Court 
(2023-2024) 
_______________ 
 
An Act to provide for the future information technology needs of Massachusetts. 
 
 Whereas, The deferred operation of this act would tend to defeat its purpose, which is to 
provide forthwith for the information technology and security needs of the commonwealth and 
deploy broadband access to the citizens of the commonwealth, therefore it is hereby declared to 
be an emergency law, necessary for the immediate preservation of the public convenience. 
 
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by the authority 
of the same, as follows: 
 
1 SECTION 1. To provide for a program of capital investments for information technology 
2 and data- and cyber-security improvements to various state programs, services, agencies, 
3 institutions and properties and to fund technology infrastructure, the sums set forth in sections 
4 2A, 2B and 2C of this act, for the several purposes and subject to the conditions specified in this 
5 act, are hereby made available through December 31, 2030, subject to the laws regulating the 
6 disbursement of public funds, which sums shall be in addition to any other amounts previously 
7 appropriated for these purposes; provided, that the amounts specified for a particular project may 
8 be adjusted in order to facilitate projects authorized in this act. 
9 SECTION 2A. 
10 EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR TECHNOLOGY SERVICES AND SECURITY 
2 of 7 
11 Office of the Secretary 
12 1790-3014 For costs associated with initiatives, projects, and expenditures to make 
13 improvements to the quality, consistency, efficiency, and delivery of any service or program for 
14 the benefit of the public and the interactions between residents and state agencies and 
15 instrumentalities of the commonwealth, including but not limited to, planning and studies, the 
16 preparation of plans and specifications, purchase, procurement, acquisition, licensing and 
17 implementation of information technology, telecommunications and data-security-related 
18 equipment, hardware, software, systems, intellectual property and related projects for various 
19 state agencies of the commonwealth; provided, that for projects the secretary of administration 
20 and finance certifies to the comptroller directly or indirectly generate state revenue or budgetary 
21 savings, the comptroller shall transfer such revenue or budgetary savings to the state treasurer for 
22 payment of debt service related to those projects; provided further, that any federal 
23 reimbursement received by a state agency in connection with projects funded from this item may 
24 be retained by the state agency or the executive office of technology services and security and 
25 expended for the purposes of the project, without further appropriation, in addition to the 
26 amounts appropriated in this item…………………………………………………..$750,000,000 
27 1790-3015 For costs associated with initiatives, projects, and expenditures to make 
28 improvements to the quality, consistency, efficiency, and delivery of any service or program to 
29 support, improve, extend, secure, or maintain technology or telecommunications infrastructure, 
30 including but not limited to, planning and studies, the preparation of plans and specifications, 
31 purchase, procurement, acquisition, licensing and implementation of information technology, 
32 telecommunications and data-security-related equipment, hardware, software, systems, 
33 intellectual property and related projects for various state agencies of the commonwealth; 
3 of 7 
34 provided, that for projects the secretary of administration and finance certifies to the comptroller 
35 directly or indirectly generate state revenue or budgetary savings, the comptroller shall transfer 
36 such revenue or budgetary savings to the state treasurer for payment of debt service related to 
37 those projects; provided further, that any federal reimbursement received by a state agency in 
38 connection with projects funded from this item may be retained by the state agency or the 
39 executive office of technology services and security and expended for the purposes of the 
40 project, without further appropriation, in addition to the amounts appropriated in this 
41 item…………………………………………………………………………………$200,000,000. 
42 1790-3016 For costs associated with planning and studies, the preparation of plans and 
43 specifications, purchase, procurement, acquisition, licensing and implementation of information 
44 technology, telecommunications and data-security-related equipment, hardware, software, 
45 systems, intellectual property and related projects for various state agencies and public 
46 instrumentalities of the commonwealth to mitigate, avoid, or respond to risks to the security of 
47 the commonwealth’s technology and telecommunications infrastructure or operations; provided, 
48 that for projects the secretary of administration and finance certifies to the comptroller directly or 
49 indirectly generate state revenue or budgetary savings, the comptroller shall transfer such 
50 revenue or budgetary savings to the state treasurer for payment of debt service related to those 
51 projects; provided further, that any federal reimbursement received by a state agency in 
52 connection with projects funded from this item may be retained by the state agency or the 
53 executive office of technology services and security and expended for the purposes of the 
54 project, without further appropriation, in addition to the amounts appropriated in this 
55 item……….………………………………………………………………………$200,000,000. 
4 of 7 
56 1790-3017 For costs associated with planning and studies, the preparation of plans and 
57 specifications, purchase, procurement, acquisition, licensing and implementation of information 
58 technology, telecommunications and data-security-related equipment, hardware, software, 
59 systems, intellectual property and related projects for various state agencies of the 
60 commonwealth including, but not limited to, executing strategic initiatives, improving business 
61 intelligence, and modernizing governmental functions; provided, that for projects the secretary of 
62 administration and finance certifies to the comptroller directly or indirectly generate state 
63 revenue or budgetary savings, the comptroller shall transfer such revenue or budgetary savings to 
64 the state treasurer for payment of debt service related to those projects; provided further, that any 
65 federal reimbursement received by a state agency in connection with projects funded from this 
66 item may be retained by the state agency or the executive office of technology services and 
67 security and expended for the purposes of the project, without further appropriation, in addition 
68 to the amounts appropriated in this item……………………………………………$250,000,000. 
69 SECTION 2B. 
70 EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE 
71 Office of the Secretary 
72 1100-2519 For costs associated with initiatives, projects and expenditures to the quality, 
73 efficiency and delivery of any service or program for the benefit of the public and the 
74 interactions between residents and state agencies and instrumentalities of the commonwealth 
75 including but not limited to, planning and studies, the preparation of plans and specifications, 
76 purchase, procurement, acquisition, licensing and implementation of artificial intelligence and 
77 machine learning systems for the various state agencies of the commonwealth, provided that 
5 of 7 
78 such initiatives, projects and expenditures are in accordance with enterprise security policies and 
79 other applicable administrative directives issued under section 3 of chapter 7D of the General 
80 Laws and approved by the executive office of technology services and security; provided further 
81 that for projects the secretary of administration and finance certifies to the comptroller directly or 
82 indirectly generate state revenue or budgetary savings, the comptroller shall transfer such 
83 revenue or budgetary savings to the state treasurer for payment of debt service related to those 
84 projects; provided further, that any federal reimbursement received by a state agency in 
85 connection with projects funded from this item may be retained by the state agency or the 
86 executive office of technology services and security and expended for the purposes of this 
87 project, without further appropriation, in addition to the amounts appropriated in this 
88 item…………………………………………………………………………………$25,000,000. 
89 1599-1953 For a competitive, matching grant program to be administered by the 
90 executive office for administration and finance, in consultation with the secretary of technology 
91 services and security, to assist municipalities with the construction of fiber broadband 
92 infrastructure and related projects and expenditures; provided, that priority for grants shall be 
93 given to completely unserved premises located in a municipality…………………$30,000,000. 
94 SECTION 2C. 
95 EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR ADMINISTRATION AND FINANCE 
96 Office of the Secretary 
97 1100-2518 For capital funding for eligible cities, towns, regional organizations whose 
98 membership is exclusively composed of municipal governments, tribes, local governmental 
99 agencies, authorities or subdivisions, quasi-state agencies, public authorities and institutions, and 
6 of 7 
100 similar governmental agencies, for purposes including but not limited to address threats to 
101 information systems, manage and reduce systemic risk, improve security of critical technology 
102 infrastructure, and improve resilience; provided, further that investments may include, but not be 
103 limited to, planning and studies, improving government efficiency and effectiveness, preparation 
104 of plans and specifications, asset modernization, information technology equipment, and 
105 technical assistance.………………………………………………………………..$150,000,000. 
106 Department of Revenue 
107 1201-0003 For the division of local services within the department of revenue, for grants 
108 to carry out the community compact information technology grant program established in 
109 conjunction with executive order 554 ………………………………………………$25,000,000. 
110 SECTION 3. Chapter 29 of the General Laws, as appearing in the 2022 Official Edition, 
111 is hereby amended by inserting after section 2DDDDDD the following section:- 
112 Section 2EEEEEE. (a) There shall be established and set up on the books of the 
113 commonwealth a separate, non-budgeted special revenue fund known as the Information 
114 Technology Federal Reimbursement Fund, which shall be administered by the secretary of 
115 technology services and security. The secretary shall expend money in the fund for information 
116 technology projects related to the Commonwealth’s health and human services. There shall be 
117 credited to the fund: (i) amounts equal to any federal financial participation revenues claimed 
118 and received by the commonwealth for eligible expenditures made from this fund or from 
119 eligible expenditures made in direct connection with eligible expenditures made from this fund; 
120 and (ii) interest earned on any money in the fund. Amounts credited to the fund shall be 
121 expended without further appropriation. 
7 of 7 
122 (b) To accommodate timing discrepancies between the receipt of revenue and related 
123 expenditures, the comptroller may certify for payment amounts not to exceed the most recent 
124 revenue estimates as certified by the secretary to be transferred, credited or deposited under this 
125 section. Money remaining in the fund at the end of a fiscal year shall not revert to the General 
126 Fund and shall be available for expenditure in subsequent fiscal years. 
127 SECTION 4. To meet the expenditures necessary to carry out sections 2A and 
128 2B, the state treasurer shall, upon request of the governor, issue and sell bonds of the 
129 commonwealth in an amount to be specified by the governor from time to time, but not 
130 exceeding, in the aggregate, $1,055,000,000. All bonds issued by the commonwealth under this 
131 section shall be designated on their face, “FutureTech Act of 2024,” and shall be issued for a 
132 maximum term of years, not exceeding 10 years, as the governor may recommend to the general 
133 court under section 3 of Article LXII of the Amendments to the Constitution. All such bonds 
134 shall be payable not later than June 30, 2039. 
135 SECTION 5. To meet the expenditures necessary to carry out section 2C, the state 
136 treasurer shall, upon request of the governor, issue and sell bonds of the commonwealth in an 
137 amount to be specified by the governor from time to time, but not exceeding, in the aggregate, 
138 $175,000,000. All bonds issued by the commonwealth under this section shall be designated on 
139 their face, "FutureTech Act of 2024”, and shall be issued for a maximum term of years, not 
140 exceeding 30 years, as the governor may recommend to the general court under section 3 of 
141 Article LXII of the Amendments to the Constitution. All such bonds shall be payable not later 
142 than June 30, 2059.
