1 of 5 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4252 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
—————— 
 
INITIATIVE PETITION OF DEBORAH THERESE MCCARTHY AND 
OTHERS. 
 
 
 
 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY. 
 
 BOSTON, JANUARY 16, 2024. 
 
Steven T. James 
Clerk of the House of Representatives 
State House 
Boston, Massachusetts 02133 
 
 
Sir: — I herewith transmit to you, in accordance with the requirements of 
Article XLVIII of the Amendments to the Constitution an initiative petition for 
“A Law Requiring that Districts Certify that Students Have Mastered the Skills, 
Competencies and Knowledge of the State Standards as a Replacement for the 
MCAS Graduation Requirement,” signed by ten qualified voters and filed with 
this department on or before December 6, 2023, together with additional 
signatures of qualified voters in the number of 101,511, being a sufficient 
number to comply with the Provisions of said Article. 
 
 
 Sincerely, 
 
WILLIAM FRANCIS GALVIN 
Secretary of the Commonwealth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AN INITIATIVE PETITION. 
 
 Pursuant to Article XLVIII of the Amendments to the Constitution of the 
Commonwealth, as amended, the undersigned qualified voters of the 
Commonwealth, ten in number at least, hereby petition for the enactment into 
law of the following measure: 
 
2 of 5 
 FILED ON: 1/18/2024 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4252 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________ 
In the One Hundred and Ninety-Third General Court 
(2023-2024) 
_______________ 
 
An Act requiring that districts certify that students have mastered the skills, competencies and 
knowledge of the state standards as a replacement for the MCAS graduation requirement. 
 
 Be it enacted by the People, and by their authority, as follows: 
 
1 SECTION 1. 
2 Section 1D of chapter 69 of the General Laws, as appearing in the 2022 Official Edition, 
3 is hereby amended by striking from the first sentence of sub-paragraph (i) the words,", as 
4 measured by the assessment instruments described in section one I." and replacing them with the 
5 following: "by satisfactorily completing coursework that has been certified by the student's 
6 district as showing mastery of the skills, competencies, and knowledge contained in the state 
7 academic standards and curriculum frameworks in the areas measured by the MCAS high school 
8 tests described in section one I administered in 2023, and in any additional areas determined by 
9 the board.". 
 
 
3 of 5 
FIRST TEN SIGNERS 
NAME RESIDENCE CITY OR TOWN 
Deborah Therese McCarthy 14 Meade Avenue Hull 
Willie Bodrick II 23 Moreland Street, # 2 Boston 
Elizabeth J. Preval 278 Broadway, # 1 Arlington 
Saul Ramos 21 Merrick Street, # 2 Worcester 
Ruth Rodrigues-Fay 36 Upsala Street, # 202 Worcester 
Dean E. Robinson 530 UM Linden Amherst 
Barbara E. Fields 43 Woodhaven Street Boston 
Naghely M. Guilamo 25 Baker Street Malden 
Cynthia A. Roy 63 Calumet Street New Bedford 
Lisa A. Guisbond 11A Gardner Road Brookline 
 
 
4 of 5 
 
CERTIFICATE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL. 
 
 
 
 
 
Honorable William Francis Galvin 
Secretary of the Commonwealth 
One Ashburton Place, Room 1705 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
 
RE: Initiative Petition No. 23-36: Initiative Petition for A Law Requiring 
that Districts Certify that Students have Mastered the Skills, 
Competencies and Knowledge of the State Standards as a Replacement 
for the MCAS Graduation Requirement 
 
Dear Secretary Galvin: 
 
 In accordance with the provisions of Article 48 of the Amendments to 
the Massachusetts Constitution, I have reviewed the above-referenced initiative 
petition, which was submitted to me on or before the first Wednesday of August 
of this year. 
 
 I hereby certify that this measure is in proper form for submission to 
the people; that the measure is not, either affirmatively or negatively, 
substantially the same as any measure which has been qualified for submission 
or submitted to the people at either of the two preceding biennial state elections; 
and that it contains only subjects that are related or are mutually dependent and 
which are not excluded from the initiative process pursuant to Article 48, the 
Initiative, Part 2, Section 2. 
 
 In accordance with Article 48, I enclose a fair, concise summary of the 
measure. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
ANDREA JOY CAMPBELL, 
Attorney General. 
 
Enclosure 
5 of 5 
Summary of 23-36. 
This proposed law would eliminate the requirement that a student pass the Massachusetts 
Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS) tests (or other statewide or district-wide 
assessments) in mathematics, science and technology, and English in order to receive a high 
school diploma. Instead, in order for a student to receive a high school diploma, the proposed 
law would require the student to complete coursework certified by the student’s district as 
demonstrating mastery of the competencies contained in the state academic standards in 
mathematics, science and technology, and English, as well as any additional areas determined by 
the Board of Elementary and Secondary Education.
