1 of 5 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4251 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
—————— 
 
INITIATIVE PETITION OF DIANA DIZOGLIO AND OTHERS. 
 
 
 
 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY. 
 
 BOSTON, JANUARY 16, 2024. 
 
Steven T. James 
Clerk of the House of Representatives 
State House 
Boston, Massachusetts 02133 
 
 
Sir: — I herewith transmit to you, in accordance with the requirements of 
Article XLVIII of the Amendments to the Constitution an initiative petition for 
“A Law Expressly Authorizing the Auditor to Audit the Legislature,” signed by 
ten qualified voters and filed with this department on or before December 6, 
2023, together with additional signatures of qualified voters in the number of 
94,404, being a sufficient number to comply with the Provisions of said Article. 
 
 
 Sincerely, 
 
WILLIAM FRANCIS GALVIN 
Secretary of the Commonwealth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AN INITIATIVE PETITION. 
 
 Pursuant to Article XLVIII of the Amendments to the Constitution of the 
Commonwealth, as amended, the undersigned qualified voters of the 
Commonwealth, ten in number at least, hereby petition for the enactment into 
law of the following measure: 
 
2 of 5 
 FILED ON: 1/17/2024 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4251 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________ 
In the One Hundred and Ninety-Third General Court 
(2023-2024) 
_______________ 
 
An Act expressly authorizing the Auditor to audit the Legislature. 
 
 Be it enacted by the People, and by their authority, as follows: 
 
1 SECTION 1. 
2 The first sentence of section 12 of chapter 11 of the General Laws, as appearing in the 
3 2022 Official Edition, is hereby deleted and replaced with the following: 
4 Section 12. The department of the state auditor shall audit the accounts, programs, 
5 activities and functions directly related to the aforementioned accounts of all departments, 
6 offices, commissions, institutions and activities of the commonwealth, including those of 
7 districts and authorities created by the general court and the general court itself, and including 
8 those of the income tax division of the department of revenue, and for such purposes, the 
9 authorized officers and employees of the department of the state auditor shall have access to such 
10 accounts at reasonable times and the department may require the production of books, 
11 documents, vouchers and other records relating to any matter within the scope of an audit 
12 conducted under this section or section 13, except tax returns. 
 
 
3 of 5 
FIRST TEN SIGNERS 
NAME RESIDENCE CITY OR TOWN 
Diana DiZoglio 30 Olive Street Methuen 
Jonathan Hecht 159 Russell Avenue Watertown 
Jennifer Nassour 12 Mountainview Road Wellesley 
Yvonne M. Spicer 3 North Lane Framingham 
Marcus S. Vaughn 35 Rochambeau Avenue Wrentham 
Neil M. M. Morrison 75 Oakridge Drive Taunton 
Paula F. Morrison 75 Oakridge Drive Taunton 
Erin Leahy 9 Cleveland Street, # 3 Somerville 
Gary D. Bernard 11 Fairfield Avenue, # 2 Melrose 
Susan A. Bernard 11 Fairfield Avenue, # 2 Melrose 
 
 
4 of 5 
CERTIFICATE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL. 
 
 
 
 
 
Honorable William Francis Galvin 
Secretary of the Commonwealth 
One Ashburton Place, Room 1705 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
 
RE: Initiative Petition No. 23-34: Initiative Petition for A Law Expressly 
Authorizing the Auditor to Audit Legislature 
 
Dear Secretary Galvin: 
 
 In accordance with the provisions of Article 48 of the Amendments to 
the Massachusetts Constitution, I have reviewed the above-referenced initiative 
petition, which was submitted to me on or before the first Wednesday of August 
of this year. 
 
 I hereby certify that this measure is in proper form for submission to 
the people; that the measure is not, either affirmatively or negatively, 
substantially the same as any measure which has been qualified for submission 
or submitted to the people at either of the two preceding biennial state elections; 
and that it contains only subjects that are related or are mutually dependent and 
which are not excluded from the initiative process pursuant to Article 48, the 
Initiative, Part 2, Section 2. 
 
 In accordance with Article 48, I enclose a fair, concise summary of the 
measure. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
ANDREA JOY CAMPBELL, 
Attorney General. 
 
Enclosure 
5 of 5 
Summary of 23-34. 
 
This proposed law would specify that the State Auditor has the authority to audit the Legislature.
