Corrected line numbers 
1 of 7 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4260 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
—————— 
 
INITIATIVE PETITION OF CHARLES DEWEY ELLISON, III AND 
OTHERS. 
 
 
 
 OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY. 
 
 BOSTON, JANUARY 16, 2024. 
 
Steven T. James 
Clerk of the House of Representatives 
State House 
Boston, Massachusetts 02133 
 
 
Sir: — I herewith transmit to you, in accordance with the requirements of 
Article XLVIII of the Amendments to the Constitution an initiative petition for 
“A Law Establishing that App-Based Drivers are not Employees, and Network 
Companies are not Employers, for Certain Purposes of the General Laws,” 
signed by ten qualified voters and filed with this department on or before 
December 6, 2023, together with additional signatures of qualified voters in the 
number of 90,112, being a sufficient number to comply with the Provisions of 
said Article. 
 
 
 Sincerely, 
 
WILLIAM FRANCIS GALVIN 
Secretary of the Commonwealth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AN INITIATIVE PETITION. 
 
 Pursuant to Article XLVIII of the Amendments to the Constitution of the 
Commonwealth, as amended, the undersigned qualified voters of the 
Commonwealth, ten in number at least, hereby petition for the enactment into 
law of the following measure: 
 
 Corrected line numbers 
2 of 7 
 
 FILED ON: 1/18/2024 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4260 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________ 
In the One Hundred and Ninety-Third General Court 
(2023-2024) 
_______________ 
 
An Act Establishing that App-Based Drivers Are Not Employees, and Network Companies Are Not Employers, for 
Certain Purposes of the General Laws. 
 
 Be it enacted by the People, and by their authority, as follows: 
 
1 SECTION 1. The purpose of this Act is to clarify that app-based drivers are not employees, and network 
2 companies are not employers, for certain purposes of the General Laws, guaranteeing app-based drivers the freedom 
3 and flexibility to choose when, where, how, and for whom they work. 
4 SECTION 2. Section 148B of chapter 149 of the General Laws is hereby amended by inserting after 
5 subsection (e) the following subsection: 
6 (f) Notwithstanding subsection (a), for the purpose of this chapter and chapter 151, an app-based driver, as 
7 defined in chapter 159AA, shall not be an employee under those chapters. 
8 SECTION 3. Section 6 of chapter 151A of the General Laws is hereby amended by inserting after 
9 subsection (x) the following subsection: (y) Service performed by an app-based driver, as defined in chapter 159AA. 
10 SECTION 4. Subsection (4) of section 1 of chapter 152 of the General Laws is hereby amended by striking 
11 out the words "and (g)" and inserting in place thereof the following words:- (g) a person who is an app-based driver, 
12 as defined in chapter 159AA, and (h) 
13 SECTION 5. The General Laws are hereby amended by inserting after chapter 159Al/2 the following 
14 chapter: 
15 Chapter 159AA 
16 Section 1. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "App-Based Drivers Classification Act." 
17 Section 2. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following 
18 meanings: 
 Corrected line numbers 
3 of 7 
19 "App-based driver" a person who is a DNC courier, a TNC driver, or both, who has a contract with a 
20 network company, and for whom the following requirements are met 
21 (a) the network company does not unilaterally prescribe specific dates, times of day, or a minimum number 
22 of hours during which the app-based driver must be logged into the network company's online-enabled application 
23 or platform; 
24 (b) the network company may not terminate the contract of the app-based driver for not accepting a 
25 specific transportation service or delivery service request except where refusal constitutes a violation of governing 
26 federal, state, or local laws or regulations; 
27 (c) the network company does not restrict the app-based driver from performing services through 
28 other network companies except while performing services through the network company's online-enabled 
29 application or platform; and 
30 (d) the network company does not contractually restrict the app-based driver from working in any 
31 other lawful occupation or business. 
32 "Contract", a written agreement, which may be electronic, between an app-based driver and a network 
33 company. 
34 "Delivery network company" or "DNC", a business entity that maintains an online-enabled application or 
35 platform used to facilitate delivery services within the Commonwealth. 
36 "Delivery network company courier" or "DNC courier", a person who provides delivery services through a 
37 DNC's online-enabled application or platform. 
38 "Delivery services", the fulfillment of a delivery request, meaning the pickup from any location in the 
39 Commonwealth of any item or items and the delivery of the items using a private passenger motor vehicle, bicycle, 
40 electric bicycle, motorized bicycle, scooter, motorized scooter, walking, public transportation, or other similar 
41 means of transportation, to a location selected by the customer located within 50 miles of the pickup location. A 
42 delivery request may include more than 1, but not more than 30, distinct orders placed by different customers. 
43 Delivery services may include the selection, collection, or purchase of items by a DNC courier, as well as other 
44 tasks incident to a delivery. Delivery services do not include assistance with residential moving services. 
45 "Network company", a business entity operating as: 
46 (a) a delivery network company; 
 Corrected line numbers 
4 of 7 
47 (b) a transportation network company; or 
48 (c) both. 
49 "Person", shall have the same definition as provided in clause twenty-third of section 7 of chapter 4 of the 
50 Massachusetts General Laws. 
51 "Private passenger motor vehicle", any passenger vehicle which has a vehicle weight rating or curb weight 
52 of 6,000 lbs. or less as per manufacturer's description of said vehicle or is a sport utility vehicle, passenger van, or 
53 pickup truck. 
54 "Transportation network company" or "TNC", shall have the same meaning as provided in section 1 of 
55 chapter 159Al/2 of the Massachusetts General Laws. 
56 "Transportation network company driver" or "TNC driver", a Transportation network driver, as defined in 
57 section 1 of chapter 159A1/2 of the Massachusetts General Laws, that provides transportation services, or a person 
58 operating a livery vehicle as defined in 540 CMR 2.00 on a TNC's digital network, as defined in section 1 of chapter 
59 159A1/2. 
60 "Transportation services", the provision of transportation facilitated by the digital network, as defined in 
61 section 1 of chapter 159A1/2 of the Massachusetts General Laws, of a TNC for which the pickup of the passenger 
62 occurs in the Commonwealth. 
63 SECTION 6. This act shall take effect as provided in Article 48 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts 
64 Constitution, as amended. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corrected line numbers 
5 of 7 
FIRST TEN SIGNERS 
NAME RESIDENCE CITY OR TOWN 
Charles Dewey Ellison, III 195 West Canton Street, # 2 Boston 
Abigail Kennedy Horrigan 114 Eastern Avenue Woburn 
Brian Gitschier 58 East Springfield Street, # 2 Boston 
Daniel A. Svirsky 248 School Street Watertown 
Sean A. Rogers 9 Atkins Street, # 1 Boston 
Caitlin Donovan 16 Fox Run Road Dover 
Brendan M. Joyce 79 Breakneck Road Sturbridge 
Troy B. McHenry 402 Ashmont Street, # 1 Boston 
Kimberly Ann Ahern 15 Pond Street Boston 
Christina M. Ellis-Hibbett 563 Ashmont Street Boston 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corrected line numbers 
6 of 7 
CERTIFICATE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL. 
 
Honorable William Francis Galvin 
Secretary of the Commonwealth 
One Ashburton Place, Room 1705 
Boston, Massachusetts 02108 
 
RE: Initiative Petition No. 23-32: Initiative Petition for A Law Establishing 
that App-Based Drivers are not Employees, and Network Companies are not 
Employers, for Certain Purposes of the General Laws – Version I 
 
Dear Secretary Galvin: 
 
In accordance with the provisions of Article 48 of the Amendments to 
the Massachusetts Constitution, I have reviewed the above-referenced 
initiative petition, which was submitted to me on or before the first Wednesday 
of August of this year. 
 
I hereby certify that this measure is in proper form for submission to 
the people; that the measure is not, either affirmatively or negatively, 
substantially the same as any measure which has been qualified for submission 
or submitted to the people at either of the two preceding biennial state 
elections; and that it contains only subjects that are related or are mutually 
dependent and which are not excluded from the initiative process pursuant to 
Article 48, the Initiative, Part 2, Section 2. 
 
In accordance with Article 48, I enclose a fair, concise summary of the 
measure. 
 
 Sincerely, 
 
 
 Andrea Joy Campbell 
 
Enclosure 
 Corrected line numbers 
7 of 7 
Summary of 23-32. 
This proposed law would specify that rideshare and delivery drivers who accept 
requests through an online-enabled application are not “employees” for purposes of 
certain Massachusetts laws regarding workplace conditions, minimum wages, 
unemployment insurance, and workers’ compensation. This proposed law would also 
specify that rideshare and delivery companies are not “employers” for purposes of those 
laws. 
The proposed law would apply to drivers for rideshare and delivery companies 
who use digital applications and who are (1) not required to work specific days or hours; 
(2) not required to accept specific requests; (3) not restricted from working with multiple 
rideshare or delivery companies; and (4) not restricted from working in any other lawful 
occupation or business.
