1 of 23 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . No. 4517 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
________________________________________ 
 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, June 5, 2024. 
 The committee on the Judiciary, to whom were referred the joint 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 45) of Lindsay N. Sabadosa, Liz 
Miranda and Erika Uyterhoeven for legislation to provide sentencing 
parity in criminal law; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1384) 
of Brian M. Ashe and others relative to service of civil process fees; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1385) of Brian M. Ashe and 
others relative to the deposit of civil process fees; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1386) of Bruce J. Ayers for legislation 
to establish a penalty for the sale of tattooing, branding or body piercing 
devices to unlicensed body art practitioners or minors; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1387) of Bruce J. Ayers for legislation 
to establish penalties for interfering with aircraft in flight by use of a laser 
pointer; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1388) of Bruce J. 
Ayers that provision be made for a minimum mandatory sentence for the 
willful destruction of burial tombs and grave markers; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1389) of Bruce J. Ayers for legislation 
to authorize the Department of Highways to acquire certain land in the city 
of Quincy and the town of Milton by eminent domain for flood control 
and prevention purposes; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1390) of Ruth B. Balser and Jacqueline Parker relative to probate court 
proceedings involving children; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1392) of Christine P. Barber relative to the definition of hate crime; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1394) of F. Jay Barrows 
relative to access to prescription monitoring data by law enforcement; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1395) of F. Jay Barrows relative 
to juror information cards; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1396) of Donald R. Berthiaume, Jr., relative to liability of persons in 
transit in private vehicles rendering care and assistance to persons in need; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1397) of Donald R. 
Berthiaume, Jr., relative to allowing children in state custody to visit 
imprisoned parents at locations other than correctional facilities; the 
2 of 23 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1398) of Donald R. Berthiaume, 
Jr., relative to healthcare proxies; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1401) of Antonio F. D. Cabral and others relative to existing 
agreements by the Commonwealth, law enforcement agencies, 
municipalities, or other subdivisions; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1402) of Antonio F. D. Cabral and others for legislation to 
establish a youth restorative justice fund; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1403) of Antonio F. D. Cabral and others for legislation to 
further regulate clerk magistrate hearings; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1405) of Daniel Cahill relative to uniform real property 
electronic recordings; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1409) 
of Peter Capano relative to creating construction wage theft private 
attorney general actions; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1410) of Peter Capano, Natalie M. Higgins and David Henry Argosky 
LeBoeuf relative to vacancies in foreclosed homes; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1411) of Gerard J. Cassidy for 
legislation to further regulate the reporting requirements of mortgages 
secured by residential property; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1412) of Simon Cataldo relative to district court jurisdiction of certain 
offenses; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1413) of Tackey 
Chan for legislation to authorize the filing for damages in small claims 
court against a public entity arising from potholes under the jurisdiction of 
said entity; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1414) of Tackey 
Chan for legislation to prohibit fraudulent representation of businesses 
against performing artists; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1415) of Tackey Chan for legislation to increase the penalty assessed on 
parents or guardians for excessive school truancy of a child; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1416) of Tackey Chan and Michael 
Morrissey relative to operating a motor vehicle while under the influence 
of intoxicating liquor or drugs; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1417) of Tackey Chan, Michael Morrissey (Norfolk District Attorney) 
and David Allen Robertson for legislation to further regulate sex offender 
registration; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1418) of 
Tackey Chan and others relative to restraining orders as they pertain to 
hate crimes; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1419) of 
Tackey Chan relative to the punishment for bank robbery; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1420) of Tackey Chan and others 
relative to certain violent crimes; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1421) of Tackey Chan and others for legislation to assist the 
investigation of serious crimes; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
3 of 23 
No. 1422) of Tackey Chan and others relative to Trial Court age, gender 
and race data collection; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1423) of Tackey Chan and others relative to motor vehicle operators 
leaving the scene of a collision; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1424) of Mike Connolly, Natalie M. Higgins and others relative to 
workplace discrimination complaints; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1425) of Mike Connolly, Lindsay N. Sabadosa and Rebecca L. 
Rausch relative to banning the use of tear gas by law enforcement; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1426) of Rob Consalvo and 
others for legislation to establish a regional keep safe facility within 
Suffolk County for the detention of persons arrested upon probable cause 
or warrant or a person arrested under a civil process; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1428) of Edward F. Coppinger relative 
to releasing personal information of police officers; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1429) of Mark J. Cusack for legislation 
to increase the penalties for continuing to practice a trade or profession 
after a certificate, registration, license or authority to do so has been 
suspended, revoked or cancelled; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1431) of Mark J. Cusack for legislation to ensure full 
participation by citizens and organizations in discussions of issues 
regarding the right to the freedom of petition, the freedom of speech, the 
freedom of expression or any matter of public concern; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1433) of Josh S. Cutler and others 
relative to the protection for certain persons from compelled disclosure of 
information; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1436) of Josh 
S. Cutler relative to total return unitrusts; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1437) of Josh S. Cutler relative to nonmanufacturing 
seller liability; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1448) of 
Vincent L. Dixon relative to the enforcement of laws and legal regulations 
related to public health, environmental pollution, and environmental 
justice; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1449) of Vincent L. 
Dixon relative to providing for the training, continuing training, and 
education of judges and other legal hearing officers; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1452) of Marjorie C. Decker, Frank A. 
Moran and Rodney M. Elliott for legislation to further regulate the 
manufacturing of assault weapons and large capacity feeding devices; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1454) of Marjorie C. Decker 
relative to firearm safety and harassment prevention orders; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1455) of Marjorie C. Decker and 
Michelle M. DuBois relative to the tracking of certain electronic devices 
4 of 23 
using toll collection technology and the inadmissibility of such data in 
criminal or civil proceeding; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1456) of Marjorie C. Decker and Lindsay N. Sabadosa relative to the 
notification of voter eligibility status of ex-offenders; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1457) of Marjorie C. Decker relative to 
determining the best interest of children in Probate and Family Court 
decisions; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1458) of Marjorie 
C. Decker and Vanna Howard relative to the rights of victims of certain 
crimes; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1460) of Marjorie 
C. Decker relative to reforming the competency to stand trial process; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1462) of David F. DeCoste and 
others relative to victims of rape and children conceived during the 
commission of said offense; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1463) of David F. DeCoste, Kelly W. Pease and Joseph D. McKenna 
relative to the injury or termination of human embryos and fetuses prior to 
birth; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1464) of David F. 
DeCoste and others relative to capital punishment for the murder of law 
enforcement officers; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1465) 
of David F. DeCoste and Joseph D. McKenna relative to rent escrow; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1466) of David F. DeCoste, 
Joseph D. McKenna and Alyson M. Sullivan-Almeida relative to 
performing or attempting to perform abortions sought because of Down 
syndrome; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1467) of Angelo 
L. D'Emilia and others relative to penalties for aiding, supporting, or 
enticing children to runaway; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1468) of Angelo L. D'Emilia and Jonathan D. Zlotnik for legislation 
to establish a prison mitigation fund for cities and towns hosting 
Department of Correction facilities; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1470) of Daniel M. Donahue relative to certain funeral service 
contracts; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1471) of Jessica 
Nohmy relative to home confinement during parole and probation for 
habitual criminals; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1472) of 
Jessica Nohmy relative to consanguinity as a defense to the crime of 
accessory after the fact; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1473) of Michelle M. DuBois relative to hate-crime protections for 
victims targeted due to gender; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1474) of Michelle M. DuBois for legislation to protect domestic 
violence and sexual assault victims and survivors; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1476) of Tricia Farley-Bouvier, Brian 
M. Ashe and others relative to threats of suicide while in court custody; 
5 of 23 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1477) of Tricia Farley-
Bouvier and others relative to photographing, videotaping or electronically 
surveilling certain persons; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1478) of Tricia Farley-Bouvier and Vanna Howard relative to reporting 
non-emergency incidents involving members of protected classes; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1483) of Dylan A. Fernandes, 
Michelle M. DuBois and Patrick Joseph Kearney relative to protecting 
buyers from unknowingly purchasing property in flood zones; the petition 
(accompanied by resolutions, House, No. 1484) of Debra Annemarie 
Metell for adoption of resolutions requesting the Governor (with consent 
of the council) to remove First Justice Patricia A. Gorman from the 
Norfolk County Probate and Family Court; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1491) of Carole A. Fiola and others for legislation to 
increase the number of associate justices in Probate and Family Court; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1493) of Brandy Fluker Oakley 
and others for legislation to remove collateral consequences and protect 
the presumption of innocence; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1496) of Paul K. Frost relative to penalties for the possession of 
silencers or firearm noise reduction devices; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1497) of Paul K. Frost relative to drug distribution 
causing death; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1498) of Paul 
K. Frost relative to sex offenders; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1499) of Paul K. Frost for legislation to authorize persons of 
full age to petition the probate court for the adoption of an embryo; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1500) of Paul K. Frost relative 
to the penalties for throwing or shooting objects at motor vehicles; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1501) of William C. Galvin 
relative to patient safety, medical error reporting and medical malpractice; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1502) of William C. Galvin 
for legislation to encourage quality reviews and reduce costs in health 
care; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1503) of William C. 
Galvin relative to the reckless evasion of police officers; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1504) of Colleen M. Garry relative to 
the reporting of missing children; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1505) of Colleen M. Garry relative to the concealment of the 
death of children and the penalties for the sale or purchase of minor 
children; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1506) of Colleen 
M. Garry relative to child custody when parents are on active military 
duty; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1507) of Colleen M. 
Garry for legislation to require blood testing for survivors of motor vehicle 
6 of 23 
accidents or collisions resulting in personal injury or death; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1508) of Colleen M. Garry relative to 
the penalty for operating a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol or 
drugs; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1509) of Colleen M. 
Garry relative to victims of rape and children conceived during the 
commission of said offense; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1510) of Colleen M. Garry, Marcus S. Vaughn and Carol A. Doherty 
relative to prohibiting sex offenders from entering public or private school 
property for any reason; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1511) of Colleen M. Garry, Marcus S. Vaughn and Kelly W. Pease 
relative to a court approved parent education program in certain probate 
proceedings; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1512) of 
Colleen M. Garry relative to the penalty for persons making annoying and 
abusive telephone calls; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1513) of Colleen M. Garry, Steven S. Howitt and Marcus S. Vaughn 
relative to manslaughter caused by reckless disregard of life while 
protesting or blocking highways or roadway access; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1514) of Colleen M. Garry and others 
relative to the penalties for protests intentionally blocking or preventing 
access to a public roadway or highway; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1515) of Colleen M. Garry for legislation to allow for the 
removal of children only if said removal results in a direct benefit to the 
child; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1516) of Colleen M. 
Garry for legislation to prohibit court ordered visitation rights to persons 
convicted of criminal offenses against minors; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 1517) of Colleen M. Garry relative to the involvement 
of non-custodial parents in child care; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1518) of Colleen M. Garry relative to shared parenting in 
cases of divorce; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1519) of 
Colleen M. Garry and Marcus S. Vaughn relative to requiring mobile 
phone providers to disclose to law enforcement officials the location of 
missing persons; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1520) of 
Colleen M. Garry for legislation to establish penalties for the theft of bulk 
merchandise containers; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1521) of Carmine Lawrence Gentile, Michelle M. DuBois and others 
relative to survivors of rape and children of rape survivors; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1522) of Carmine Lawrence Gentile and 
Sal N. DiDomenico that certain legal material in electronic records be 
designated as official; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1523) 
of Carmine Lawrence Gentile for legislation to establish the Uniform 
7 of 23 
Power of Attorney act; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1524) of Carmine Lawrence Gentile and Susannah M. Whipps for 
legislation to eliminate the charitable immunity defense in certain court 
actions; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1525) of Carmine 
Lawrence Gentile and others relative to modernizing notary services; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1526) of Henry P. Sorett 
relative to claims and indemnity procedures for the Commonwealth, 
municipalities, counties and districts and their officers and employees; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1527) of Susan Williams 
Gifford, Joseph D. McKenna and Steven George Xiarhos relative to 
violent protection orders; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1528) of Carlos González, Russell E. Holmes and others for legislation to 
establish a special commission (including members of the General Court) 
relative to increasing racial diversity among judges; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1529) of Carlos González, Smitty 
Pignatelli and others relative to discrimination in the leasing of certain 
dwelling units; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1530) of 
Carlos González and others relative to nonprofit receivership of vacant 
residential property; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1531) 
of Carlos González and others relative to penalties for crimes against 
seniors; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1532) of Carlos 
González and others relative to abuse prevention; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1534) of Kenneth I. Gordon relative to 
the classification of arrest warrants; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1535) of Kenneth I. Gordon for legislation to establish a 
special commission (including members of the General Court) to conduct 
a study and make recommendations on how a summons and complaint 
system may be used in place of arrest in response to certain non-violent 
criminal offenses; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1539) of 
Danielle W. Gregoire and others relative to health care proxies; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1540) of Richard M. Haggerty 
for legislation to further regulate virtual notarization; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1541) of Richard M. Haggerty relative 
to the penalty for illegally removing certain parts of historical homes; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1543) of James K. Hawkins and 
Patrick M. O'Connor relative to protecting free speech of employees; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1544) of Christopher Hendricks 
and others for legislation to clarify the charitable purposes of certain 
organizations; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1546) of 
Natalie M. Higgins, Tricia Farley-Bouvier and others for legislation to 
8 of 23 
establish a bill of rights for survivors of sexual assault and related 
purposes; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1549) of Natalie 
M. Higgins relative to mortgage discharge by out-of-state mortgagees; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1553) of Russell E. Holmes and 
Michelle M. DuBois relative to furlough programs for incarcerated 
persons; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1555) of Russell E. 
Holmes relative to providing for protections in the processing of personal 
data and the free movement of personal data; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1556) of Steven S. Howitt and Alan Silvia relative to 
protests or demonstrations within 100 yards of the residences of elected 
officials; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1557) of Steven S. 
Howitt and others for legislation to establish an animal abuse registry; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1558) of Steven S. Howitt and 
others relative to the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance 
definition of antisemitism; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1560) of Daniel J. Hunt relative to the protection of the families of violent 
crime from intimidation; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1562) of Daniel J. Hunt relative to reducing the storage of obsolete court 
papers; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1563) of Daniel J. 
Hunt relative to prohibiting certain disorderly begging or panhandling and 
providing a penalty for violations; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1564) of Daniel J. Hunt for legislation to require sex offenders 
to submit a current color photograph to the sex offender registry; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1566) of Daniel J. Hunt relative 
to the public posting or displaying of the personal information of certain 
protected judicial officials and their family members; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1568) of Daniel J. Hunt for legislation 
to increase the safety of courthouses; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1569) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others for legislation to 
prohibit certain sex offenders from loitering within 500 feet of school bus 
stops; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1570) of Bradley H. 
Jones, Jr., and others relative to juror service; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 1571) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to 
expanding protections against incest; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1572) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to 
prohibiting motor vehicle tracking devices without consent; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1573) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and 
others relative to the penalty for electronic mail message, web page, or 
other online service phishing; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1574) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to criminal offender 
9 of 23 
record information fees; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1575) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others for legislation to authorize the 
Division of Victim Compensation and Assistance to monitor profits from 
criminal activities of incarcerated persons; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1576) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to the 
penalties for knowingly communicating false reports of active shooting 
incidents at schools; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1578) 
of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to prejudgment interest rates; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1579) of Bradley H. Jones, 
Jr., and others for legislation to establish a special commission (including 
members of the General Court) to identify the annual costs of providing 
court-appointed counsel for sex offender classification hearings; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1580) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., 
and others relative to the release of sex offender information to victims; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1581) of Bradley H. Jones, 
Jr., and others relative to the protection of children; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1582) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and 
others relative to the enticement of children online; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1583) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and 
others relative to increasing the liability for permitting an intoxicated 
arrestee to operate a motor vehicle; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1584) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to 
prohibiting level 3 sex offenders from residing together; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1585) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and 
others for legislation to remove state-funded counsel for sex offender 
classification hearings; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1586) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to providing for the 
crime of fetal homicide; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1587) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to authorizing the courts 
of the Commonwealth to establish a system of juvenile restitution; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1588) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., 
and others relative to the penalty for assault or an assault and battery upon 
another and in the presence of a child; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1589) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to eminent 
domain taking damages; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1590) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others for legislation to establish 
mandatory post release supervision; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1591) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others for legislation to 
further regulate guardianship; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1592) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr. and others relative to establishing a 
10 of 23 
self-defense exception in the interception of wire and oral 
communications; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1593) of 
Bradley H. Jones, Jr. and others relative to the defense of private property 
rights through the prevention of abusive eminent domain takings; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1595) of Patrick Joseph 
Kearney relative to reclassification of sex offenders by the Sex Offender 
Registry Board; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1596) of 
Patrick Joseph Kearney and Vanna Howard relative to protection of 
deceased family members against foreclosure and other civil action; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1598) of Mary S. Keefe and 
others relative to the sealing of certain records; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 1600) of Sally P. Kerans and others relative to 
insurance liability for foster care providers; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1604) of Kay Khan relative to investigations of reports of 
abuse and neglect; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1605) of 
Kay Khan, Vanna Howard and Carol A. Doherty relative to obtaining 
relief from abuse and harassment; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1606) of Meghan Kilcoyne relative to salaries of judicial 
branch employees; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1607) of 
Michael P. Kushmerek, Angelo J. Puppolo, Jr., and others relative to 
height discrimination; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1608) 
of Michael P. Kushmerek and Vanna Howard relative to great-grandparent 
visitation rights; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1610) of 
Kathleen R. LaNatra, Christopher Hendricks and Michael D. Brady 
relative to assault and battery upon certain employees of private railroads 
delivering a public service; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1611) of Kathleen R. LaNatra relative to including "stabbing" in the 
definition of attempted murder; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1612) of John J. Lawn, Jr., and others relative to due process; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1613) of John J. Lawn, Jr., and 
others relative to extending the statute of limitations for incest; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1616) of David Henry Argosky 
LeBoeuf and Vanna Howard relative to legal proceedings to recover 
damages caused by exposure to lead; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1617) of Jack Patrick Lewis, Dylan A. Fernandes and others 
relative to the penalties for violations of age of consent laws for young 
adults; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1618) of Jack Patrick 
Lewis, Samantha Montaño and others for legislation to repeal certain laws 
prohibiting acts performed with other persons or animals; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1619) of David Paul Linsky and others 
11 of 23 
relative to increasing penalties for the illegal sale and possession of 
firearms; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1620) of David 
Paul Linsky relative to harassment prevention orders; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1621) of David Paul Linsky relative to 
the criminal penalty for certain disorderly persons and disturbers of the 
peace; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1622) of David Paul 
Linsky for legislation to require the review of criminal offender record 
information for persons volunteering at organizations conducting activities 
and programs for children; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1623) of David Paul Linsky relative to further regulating the appointment 
of certain guardians by the Probate Court; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1624) of David Paul Linsky relative to first justice and 
regional administrative justice stipends; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1625) of David Paul Linsky that the Board of Bar Overseers 
be prohibited from assessing an annual registration fee for attorneys who 
retire from the practice of law; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1626) of David Paul Linsky relative to costs of appeals by certain 
defendants; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1627) of David 
Paul Linsky for legislation to require the inclusion of certain civil rights 
offense information in the statewide domestic violence record keeping 
system; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1628) of David Paul 
Linsky relative to intimidation in the criminal justice system; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1629) of David Paul Linsky for 
legislation to establish sentencing guidelines for convictions of criminal 
offenses in the Commonwealth; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1630) of David Paul Linsky relative to indigent defense counsel; the 
petition (accompanied by resolve, House, No. 1631) of David Paul Linsky 
for an investigation by a special commission (including members of the 
General Court) of the provisions governing durable power of attorney as 
codified and administered in the Commonwealth; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1632) of David Paul Linsky for 
legislation to further regulate safety and security in courthouses; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1633) of Kate Lipper-
Garabedian and Peter J. Koutoujian (Middlesex County Sheriff) relative to 
adjournments of examinations and trials; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1634) of Kate Lipper-Garabedian and Jason M. Lewis 
relative to judicial discretion for probation; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1635) of Kate Lipper-Garabedian and Marian T. Ryan 
(Middlesex County District Attorney) relative to the penalties for property 
crimes against elderly or disabled persons; the petition (accompanied by 
12 of 23 
bill, House, No. 1636) of Kate Lipper-Garabedian, Marian T. Ryan 
(Middlesex County District Attorney) and Carol A. Doherty relative to 
providing protection from child enticement; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1637) of Kate Lipper-Garabedian and Marian Ryan 
(Middlesex District Attorney) for legislation to bring the crime of leaving 
the scene of personal injury causing death within the jurisdiction of the 
district court; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1638) of Kate 
Lipper-Garabedian and Marian T. Ryan (Middlesex County District 
Attorney) for legislation to further define abuse and neglect of children; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1639) of Jay D. Livingstone, 
Christine P. Barber and others for an investigation by a working group 
(including members of the General Court) relative to gender-based price 
discrimination; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1641) of Jay 
D. Livingstone relative to uniform fiduciary access to digital assets; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1643) of Jay D. Livingstone 
relative to lowering the age for persons serving certain summonses and 
complaints; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1644) of Jay D. 
Livingstone relative to testimony after grant of immunity to witnesses; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1645) of Jay D. Livingstone 
relative to the availability of immunity to witnesses in the courts of the 
Commonwealth; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1646) of 
Jay D. Livingstone for legislation to improve after hours bail procedures; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1647) of Jay D. Livingstone 
relative to the penalties for causing fires and explosions; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1649) of Jay D. Livingstone relative to 
the reliability of testifying informants; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1650) of Jay D. Livingstone relative to protecting youth during 
custodial interrogations; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1651) of Jay D. Livingstone relative to addressing racial disparity in jury 
selection; the petition (accompanied by resolutions, House, No. 1652) of 
Amy Connor and others for adoption of resolutions requesting the 
Governor (with consent of the council) to remove First Justice Patricia A. 
Gorman from the Norfolk County Probate and Family Court; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1653) of Jay D. Livingstone and Jason 
M. Lewis relative to claims against certain corporations, its officers, or 
other persons for providing electronic records, information, facilities, or 
assistance in accordance with the terms of search warrants; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1654) of Jay D. Livingstone relative to 
arbitration agreements; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1655) of Jay D. Livingstone and David Henry Argosky LeBoeuf relative 
13 of 23 
to fair housing protections for victims of abusive behavior; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1656) of Marc T. Lombardo relative to 
indemnifying parents and legal guardians who have followed medical care 
recommended by licensed medical or mental health providers; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1658) of Christopher M. Markey 
relative to solicitation of juveniles under sixteen to commit murder; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1659) of Christopher M. 
Markey relative to district court jurisdiction; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1660) of Christopher M. Markey relative to the tax status 
of alimony; the petition (accompanied by resolve, House, No. 1661) of 
Christopher M. Markey for an investigation by special commission 
(including members of the General Court) to study the legal and 
regulatory framework governing the bail system; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1662) of Christopher M. Markey 
relative to alleged police misconduct; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1663) of Christopher M. Markey relative to the penalties for 
reckless operation of motor vehicles; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1665) of Christopher M. Markey relative to notes of contracts 
and dissolutions of liens; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1666) of Christopher M. Markey relative to the penalty for causing high 
speed chases; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1667) of 
Christopher M. Markey relative to operating under the influence; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1668) of Christopher M. 
Markey relative to the removal of a trial default of defendants who fail to 
appear at trial; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1670) of 
Joseph W. McGonagle, Jr., relative to judicial review of local land use 
decisions; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1672) of Joseph 
D. McKenna and Michael J. Soter relative to the videotaping or taking of 
moving digital images of activities in the backyard of certain adjoining 
residential properties; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1673) 
of Joseph D. McKenna, Angelo L. D'Emilia and Michael J. Soter relative 
to trafficking certain illegal drugs and firearms; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 1674) of Paul McMurtry relative to the liability of 
farmers’ markets; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1675) of 
Paul McMurtry and Vanna Howard relative to the recovery of withheld 
rent; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1676) of Rita A. 
Mendes relative to liability for injuries and damages occurring at work 
sites; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1677) of Joan 
Meschino and others relative to access to justice for persons aggrieved by 
actions of intentional discrimination; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
14 of 23 
House, No. 1678) of Joan Meschino relative to privileged 
communications; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1679) of 
Joan Meschino, Lindsay N. Sabadosa and Natalie M. Higgins relative to 
improving legal and administrative proceedings for court-involved 
children and families; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1680) 
of Lenny Mirra relative to the reporting of certain violations and the 
protection of whistleblowers, so-called; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1681) of Rady Mom and Rodney M. Elliott relative to the 
penalties for using weapons with intent to strike dwelling houses; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1682) of Samantha Montaño 
and Peter Capano relative to summary process and rental assistance; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1684) of Frank A. Moran, Kate 
Lipper-Garabedian and others relative to community corrections; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1689) of Frank A. Moran and 
others relative to protecting titles to real estate; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 1691) of Michael J. Moran relative to authorizing the 
recording of conversations during certain investigations; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1692) of David K. Muradian, Jr., 
relative to the indemnification of certain persons from civil proceedings 
for injuries or deaths of persons unlawfully entering their dwelling; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1693) of David K. Muradian, 
Jr., relative to the felony threshold for multiple offenses for the crime of 
theft; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1695) of James M. 
Murphy for legislation to establish penalties for landlords knowingly 
providing premises to be used for illegal drug purposes; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1696) of James M. Murphy relative to 
the penalties for willful injury to public defenders and other court 
personnel; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1697) of James 
M. Murphy relative to penalties for the sale of energy drinks to persons 
under the age of 18; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1699) 
of Brian W. Murray relative to making technical changes to the laws 
regulating a certain notarial act; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1701) of Tram T. Nguyen, Christine P. Barber and others relative to 
supporting survivors of trafficking and abuse and encouraging increased 
access to opportunities through expungement and/or sealing of records; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1702) of Tram T. Nguyen, 
Natalie M. Higgins and others relative to protections for sexual assault 
survivors; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1704) of Tram T. 
Nguyen, Bud L. Williams and others for legislation to reform the hate 
crime statutes; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1706) of 
15 of 23 
Tram T. Nguyen and Rebecca L. Rausch for legislation to provide 
compensation for loss of income for victims of forced labor and sexual 
servitude; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1707) of Tram T. 
Nguyen and Simon Cataldo relative to the malicious doxing of personal 
information; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1709) of Tram 
T. Nguyen for legislation to further protect employees through a private 
right of action; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1711) of 
James J. O'Day and Daniel M. Donahue relative to the identity of victims 
of certain crimes; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1712) of 
Maureen Martowska for legislation to improve visitation rights for 
grandparents; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1719) of 
Edward R. Philips relative to criminal offender record information checks; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1721) of Edward R. Philips 
relative to the health of public safety officers exposed to hypodermic 
syringes or hypodermic needles; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1722) of Michael Hyde relative to wiretapping; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1723) of Smitty Pignatelli and others 
relative to legal advertisements in online-only newspapers; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1724) of Angelo J. Puppolo, Jr., and 
others relative to regulation of recreational games at senior centers; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1725) of Angelo J. Puppolo, Jr., 
and others relative to bail decision appeals; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1727) of Orlando Ramos and Carlos González for 
legislation to establish a commission to study judicial accountability in the 
Commonwealth; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1730) of 
David Allen Robertson relative to penalties for the slaughter of cats and 
dogs; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1733) of David M. 
Rogers relative to opportunities for individuals in the criminal offender 
record information system; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1734) of David M. Rogers, Marian T. Ryan (Middlesex District Attorney) 
and Michelle M. DuBois relative to the penalties for inducing a minor to 
engage in, agree to engage in or offer to engage in prostitution or sexual 
conduct; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1735) of David M. 
Rogers, Marian T. Ryan (Middlesex District Attorney) and Michelle M. 
DuBois for legislation to ensure the ability to prosecute repeat operating 
under the influence offenses; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1737) of David M. Rogers and Ruth B. Balser relative to advertising 
for justices of the peace; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1738) of David M. Rogers relative to establishing presumptive parole 
using structured, actuarially-based guidelines; the petition (accompanied 
16 of 23 
by bill, House, No. 1739) of David M. Rogers relative to life sentences 
without eligibility for parole; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1740) of David M. Rogers relative to establishing reasonable 
limitations on the solitary confinement of inmates 21 years of age or 
younger; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1741) of John H. 
Rogers relative to legislative witness tampering; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 1742) of John H. Rogers relative to child custody 
arrangements of military personnel; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1743) of John H. Rogers relative to police use of epinephrine 
autoinjectors; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1744) of 
Jeffrey N. Roy relative to uniform partition of heirs property; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1747) of Jeffrey N. Roy relative to the 
medical peer review law; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1748) of Jeffrey N. Roy and others relative to access to a decedent's 
electronic mail accounts; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1749) of Jeffrey N. Roy relative to payments on personal injury protection 
benefit claims; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1751) of 
Jeffrey N. Roy relative to payments on personal injury protection benefit 
claims; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1755) of Lindsay N. 
Sabadosa relative to the reporting of bail and charges to the Committee for 
Public Counsel Services; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1761) of Adam Scanlon, Bud L. Williams and Vanna Howard relative to 
the penalty for sexual assaults upon persons with disabilities; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1763) of Alan Silvia for legislation to 
provide legal services to small business property owners; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1764) of Alan Silvia and Paul A. 
Schmid, III relative to allowing police officers to access or view 
recordings of incidents before making statements; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1765) of Todd M. Smola relative to 
court filing fees; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1766) of 
Priscila S. Sousa and Marian Ryan relative to sentencing for hate crimes; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1767) of Thomas M. 
Stanley relative to establishing penalties for the filing of false reports 
against police officers; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1769) of William M. Straus relative to the use of administrative subpoenas 
to obtain telephone and internet records without judicial review; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1770) of Alyson M. Sullivan-
Almeida and others relative to prohibiting child sex dolls; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1771) of Alyson M. Sullivan-Almeida 
and others relative to parental visitation and custody for children of rape 
17 of 23 
victims; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1772) of Alyson M. 
Sullivan-Almeida and others relative to penalties for possession of 
dangerous weapons by persons in the custody of certain correctional 
facilities; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1773) of Alyson 
M. Sullivan-Almeida and others relative to penalties for persons confined 
to correctional facilities who commit assault or assault and battery by 
means of dangerous weapons upon officers, other employees, volunteers 
or employees of contractors; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1774) of Alyson M. Sullivan-Almeida and others relative to prohibiting 
registered sex offenders from changing names; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 1775) of Alyson M. Sullivan-Almeida and others 
relative to sexual harassment and discrimination policies in the 
Commonwealth; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1776) of 
Alyson M. Sullivan-Almeida and others relative to protecting domestic 
violence victims; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1777) of 
Alyson M. Sullivan-Almeida and others relative to indecent assault and 
battery; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1778) of Alyson M. 
Sullivan-Almeida and others relative to nondisclosure agreements relative 
to sexual harassment and discrimination; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 1779) of Alyson M. Sullivan-Almeida and others for 
legislation to establish a permanent commission (including members of 
the General Court) to study the service standards for sexual assault and 
domestic violence service providers; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1780) of Alyson M. Sullivan-Almeida and others for an 
investigation by a special commission (including members of the General 
Court) relative to statewide standards for sexual assault and domestic 
violence service providers; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1781) of Jeffrey Rosario Turco, Steven George Xiarhos and others relative 
to drug induced homicide; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
1782) of Jeffrey Rosario Turco relative to child-centered family law; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1783) of Jeffrey Rosario Turco, 
Joseph D. McKenna and Kelly W. Pease relative to informed consent prior 
to the performance of certain chemical abortions; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1784) of Jeffrey Rosario Turco, Joseph 
D. McKenna and Kelly W. Pease relative to preserving maternal life and 
the life of unborn children in the performance of abortions or instances of 
miscarriages; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1785) of 
Jeffrey Rosario Turco and Joseph D. McKenna relative to prohibiting 
abortions because of the diagnosis of Down syndrome in unborn children; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1786) of Jeffrey Rosario 
18 of 23 
Turco relative to the wiretap law; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1787) of Chynah Tyler, Samantha Montaño and others relative 
to sealing cannabis records and promoting uniform digital record keeping; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1788) of Chynah Tyler and 
Bud L. Williams relative to false reporting of emergencies; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1789) of Chynah Tyler for legislation to 
establish a review of the impact and effectiveness of facility programming 
by the Department of Correction including a special commission 
(including members of the General Court) relative to the effects of health 
care in department facilities and a special commission (including members 
of the General Court) relative to the effects of confinement in the 
departmental disciplinary unit on the mental health and wellness of 
prisoners; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1790) of Chynah 
Tyler and Lindsay N. Sabadosa relative to ensuring equitable access to 
cannabis related expungement; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1792) of Chynah Tyler relative to the composition of the Victim and 
Witness Assistance Board; the petition (accompanied by resolve, House, 
No. 1793) of Chynah Tyler for an investigation by a special commission 
(including members of the General Court) relative to gender responsive 
programming for juvenile justice system involved girls; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1795) of Chynah Tyler and others 
relative to establishing a jail and prison construction moratorium; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1796) of Chynah Tyler and 
others relative to telephone service for inmates in correctional institutions; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1798) of Steven Ultrino for 
legislation to establish a jury duty exemption for breastfeeding parents; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1799) of Steven Ultrino and 
others relative to the termination of rental agreements or tenancy by 
certain tenants; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1800) of 
Erika Uyterhoeven, Lindsay N. Sabadosa and Danillo A. Sena for 
legislation to restore judicial discretion in controlled substance cases; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1801) of Andres X. Vargas and 
Kate Donaghue relative to the penalty for the issuance of unwanted opioid 
prescriptions; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1802) of 
Andres X. Vargas and others relative to improving juvenile justice data 
collection; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1803) of Andres 
X. Vargas for legislation to exonerate all individuals accused of witchcraft 
during the Salem Witch Trials; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1804) of Andres X. Vargas for legislation to eliminate standard 
conditions in probation; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
19 of 23 
1806) of Marcus S. Vaughn relative to the enforcement of mandatory 
minimum sentences for firearm related crimes; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 1807) of Marcus S. Vaughn relative to penalties for 
aiding, supporting, or enticing children to runaway; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1808) of Marcus S. Vaughn relative to 
pill press machines; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1809) 
of Marcus S. Vaughn for legislation to further regulate the tracking of 
motor vehicles; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1810) of 
David T. Vieira and Vanna Howard relative to judgment for alimony; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1812) of Thomas P. Walsh 
relative to health care proxies; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1814) of Susannah M. Whipps and Christopher Hendricks for 
legislation to establish penalties for threatening an employee of 
Department of Children and Families; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 1815) of Fred Elliott relative to counsel in eviction summary 
process proceedings; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1816) 
of Susannah M. Whipps relative to the right to maintain actions in the 
Superior Court; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1817) of 
Bud L. Williams relative to decriminalizing non-violent and verbal student 
misconduct; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1818) of Bud 
L. Williams relative to eliminating mandatory minimum sentences related 
to drug offenses; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1819) of 
Bud L. Williams relative to the expungement of certain past marijuana 
convictions; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1822) of 
Steven George Xiarhos relative to fentanyl arrests; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1823) of Steven George Xiarhos and 
others relative to assault and battery against healthcare personnel, school 
officials, and first responders; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 1824) of Steven George Xiarhos relative to the fees for furnishing 
transcripts of notes; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1825) 
of Steven George Xiarhos and others relative to enhanced penalties for 
assault and battery against school sports officials; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1826) of Steven George Xiarhos for an 
investigation by a special commission (including members of the General 
Court) relative to the establishment of a statewide registry of persons 
convicted for the sale or trafficking of certain Class A drugs; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 1827) of Steven George Xiarhos relative 
to bail fees; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1828) of 
Jonathan D. Zlotnik and others relative to penalties for assault and battery 
upon a corrections officer or other Department of Correction staff person; 
20 of 23 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 1829) of Jonathan D. 
Zlotnik and Joseph D. McKenna relative to hunter harassment; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 3590) of Kip A. Diggs relative to 
homestead protection; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3591) 
of Judith A. Garcia, James C. Arena-DeRosa and Samantha Montaño 
relative to standard procedures in probate court; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 3593) of Judith A. Garcia and Samantha Montaño 
relative to certified translations in court proceedings; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 3594) of Judith A. Garcia and Samantha 
Montaño relative to jurisdiction in paternity actions; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 3595) of Judith A. Garcia, James C. 
Arena-DeRosa and Samantha Montaño relative to court petitions for 
special findings in relation to certain immigrant juveniles; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 3596) of Judith A. Garcia and Samantha 
Montaño relative to improper service of process in certain custody or legal 
status of children cases; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
3763) of Howard Caras relative to healthcare proxy information; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3787) of Patricia A. Haddad 
that the Probate and Family Court Department be authorized to conduct a 
study of guardians ad litem; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
3818) of Manny Cruz relative to preventing rampant online technological 
exploitation and criminal trafficking and establishing a special 
commission (including members of the General Court) to examine 
sentencing for criminal online technological exploitation; the joint petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 3868) of Sally P. Kerans, Joan B. 
Lovely and others relative to establishing the office of the tenant advocate 
in the Office of the Attorney General; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 3922) of Kate Lipper-Garabedian relative to preventing false 
confessions; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3932) of James 
K. Hawkins and Steven George Xiarhos relative to liability for damage by 
dogs; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3939) of James J. 
O'Day relative to the mental well-being of new mothers facing criminal 
charges; the joint petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3945) of 
Russell E. Holmes and Liz Miranda relative to sentencing for felony 
murder; the joint petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3955) of 
Russell E. Holmes, Liz Miranda and Lindsay N. Sabadosa for legislation 
to provide for second look review of the sentences of certain incarcerated 
persons; the joint petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3956) of 
Russell E. Holmes, Liz Miranda and others for legislation to authorize an 
independent correctional oversight office to facilitate the 
21 of 23 
recommendations of the Special Legislative Commission on Structural 
Racism in Correctional Facilities of the Commonwealth; the joint petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 3962) of Russell E. Holmes and Liz 
Miranda for legislation to provide equitable sentencing for felony and joint 
venture murder; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3991) of 
Daniel J. Hunt relative to the assistant clerks of the Supreme Judicial 
Court for Suffolk County; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
4045) of James C. Arena-DeRosa (by vote of the town) for legislation to 
authorize the town of Hopkinton to acquire certain land in the town of 
Milford by eminent domain for the repair and maintenance of the Lake 
Maspenock dam; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 4102) of 
Andrew Limeri relative to software legal agreements; and the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 4143) of Brandy Fluker Oakley and 
Andrea Joy Campbell (Attorney General) for legislation to establish a trust 
fund to promote environmental justice in the Office of the Attorney 
General, reports recommending that the accompanying order (House, No. 
4517) ought to be adopted. 
 
For the committee, 
 
MICHAEL S. DAY. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 of 23 
 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4517 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
 
 
 
 
House of Representatives, June 5, 2024. 
 
1 Ordered, That the committee on the Judiciary be authorized to sit during a recess of the 
2 General Court to make an investigation and study of House documents numbered 45, 1384, 
3 1385, 1386, 1387, 1388, 1389, 1390, 1392, 1394, 1395, 1396, 1397, 1398, 1401, 1402, 1403, 
4 1405, 1409, 1410, 1411, 1412, 1413, 1414, 1415, 1416, 1417, 1418, 1419, 1420, 1421, 1422, 
5 1423, 1424, 1425, 1426, 1428, 1429, 1431, 1433, 1436, 1437, 1448, 1449, 1452, 1454, 1455, 
6 1456, 1457, 1458, 1460, 1462, 1463, 1464, 1465, 1466, 1467, 1468, 1470, 1471, 1472, 1473, 
7 1474, 1476, 1477, 1478, 1483, 1484, 1491, 1493, 1496, 1497, 1498, 1499, 1500, 1501, 1502, 
8 1503, 1504, 1505, 1506, 1507, 1508, 1509, 1510, 1511, 1512, 1513, 1514, 1515, 1516, 1517, 
9 1518, 1519, 1520, 1521, 1522, 1523, 1524, 1525, 1526, 1527, 1528, 1529, 1530, 1531, 1532, 
10 1534, 1535, 1539, 1540, 1541, 1543, 1544, 1546, 1549, 1553, 1555, 1556, 1557, 1558, 1560, 
11 1562, 1563, 1564, 1566, 1568, 1569, 1570, 1571, 1572, 1573, 1574, 1575, 1576, 1578, 1579, 
12 1580, 1581, 1582, 1583, 1584, 1585, 1586, 1587, 1588, 1589, 1590, 1591, 1592, 1593, 1595, 
13 1596, 1598, 1600, 1604, 1605, 1606, 1607, 1608, 1610, 1611, 1612, 1613, 1616, 1617, 1618, 
14 1619, 1620, 1621, 1622, 1623, 1624, 1625, 1626, 1627, 1628, 1629, 1630, 1631, 1632, 1633, 

23 of 23 
15 1634, 1635, 1636, 1637, 1638, 1639, 1641, 1643, 1644, 1645, 1646, 1647, 1649, 1650, 1651, 
16 1652, 1653, 1654, 1655, 1656, 1658, 1659, 1660, 1661, 1662, 1663, 1665, 1666, 1667, 1668, 
17 1670, 1672, 1673, 1674, 1675, 1676, 1677, 1678, 1679, 1680, 1681, 1682, 1684, 1689, 1691, 
18 1692, 1693, 1695, 1696, 1697, 1699, 1701, 1702, 1704, 1706, 1707, 1709, 1711, 1712, 1719, 
19 1721, 1722, 1723, 1724, 1725, 1727, 1730, 1733, 1734, 1735, 1737, 1738, 1739, 1740, 1741, 
20 1742, 1743, 1744, 1747, 1748, 1749, 1751, 1755, 1761, 1763, 1764, 1765, 1766, 1767, 1769, 
21 1770, 1771, 1772, 1773, 1774, 1775, 1776, 1777, 1778, 1779, 1780, 1781, 1782, 1783, 1784, 
22 1785, 1786, 1787, 1788, 1789, 1790, 1792, 1793, 1795, 1796, 1798, 1799, 1800, 1801, 1802, 
23 1803, 1804, 1806, 1807, 1808, 1809, 1810, 1812, 1814, 1815, 1816, 1817, 1818, 1819, 1822, 
24 1823, 1824, 1825, 1826, 1827, 1828, 1829, 3590, 3591, 3593, 3594, 3595, 3596, 3763, 3787, 
25 3818, 3868, 3922, 3932, 3939, 3945, 3955, 3956, 3962, 3991, 4045, 4102 and 4143, relative to 
26 criminal offenses, civil liability, child welfare, the justice system, public safety, drugs offenses, 
27 assault and other judiciary issues. 
28 Said committee shall report to the General Court the results of its investigation and study 
29 and its recommendations, if any, together with drafts of legislation necessary to carry such 
30 recommendations into effect, by filing the same with the Clerk of the House of Representatives 
31 on or before December 31, 2024.
