1 of 3 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . No. 4578 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
________________________________________ 
 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, May 6, 2024. 
 The committee on Advanced Information Technology, the Internet and 
Cybersecurity, to whom were referred the petition (accompanied by bill, 
Senate, No. 27) of James B. Eldridge and Jason M. Lewis for legislation to 
protect private electronic communication, browsing and other activity; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, Senate, No. 28) of James B. Eldridge for 
legislation to ensure a free and open internet in the commonwealth; the 
petition (accompanied by resolve, Senate, No. 38) of Walter F. Timilty 
that provisions be made for an investigation and study by a special 
commission to review advancements in educational technology, 
digital/online learning and related programs in order to provide the 
Commonwealth with the most current research and information; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 59) of John Barrett, III and 
Smitty Pignatelli relative to the oversight of cable contracts; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 61) of Tackey Chan and Denise C. 
Garlick relative to filing actions of slander against anonymous parties on 
the internet; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 65) of Carlos 
González and Bud L. Williams relative to access to the affordable 
connectivity program; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 68) 
of David Henry Argosky LeBoeuf relative to internet service outages; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 70) of Kate Lipper-Garabedian, 
Josh S. Cutler and Thomas M. Stanley that the Office of the State 
Treasurer develop and periodically review and update a digital module and 
resources on cryptocurrencies and digital assets; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 71) of Kate Lipper-Garabedian and Thomas M. 
Stanley for legislation to establish and implement a pilot program to 
examine the use of blockchain technology; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 73) of Christopher M. Markey relative to the interception 
of wire and oral communications; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 75) of Frank A. Moran and Estela A. Reyes for legislation to 
provide financial assistance to certain residents to expand the availability 
of broadband internet connectivity; 
2 of 3 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 78) of David Allen 
Robertson and Andres X. Vargas relative to the awarding of money to 
municipal agencies for the purpose of expanding, founding, advertising or 
maintaining of publicly-administered broadband internet service 
providers; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 79) of David M. 
Rogers and Andres X. Vargas for legislation to provide for net neutrality 
and consumer protection; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
81) of Danillo A. Sena and others for an investigation by the Department 
of Public Health of broadband internet access and its relation to the public 
health objectives; the petition (accompanied by resolve, House, No. 86) of 
Thomas P. Walsh for an investigation by a special commission relative to 
advancements in educational technology, digital and online learning, and 
related programs; and the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3831) 
of David Henry Argosky LeBoeuf for legislation to establish a 
Commonwealth internet service provider to be known as Commonwealth 
ISP, reports recommending that the accompanying order (House, No. 
4578) ought to be adopted. 
 
For the committee, 
 
TRICIA FARLEY-BOUVIER. 
 
3 of 3 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4578 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
 
 
 
 
 House of Representatives, May 6, 2024. 
 
1 Ordered, That the committee on Advanced Information Technology, the Internet and 
2 Cybersecurity be authorized to sit during a recess of the General Court to make an investigation 
3 and study of Senate documents numbered 27, 28 and 38 and House documents numbered 59, 61, 
4 65, 68, 70, 71, 73, 75, 78, 79, 81, 86 and 3831, relative to advanced information technology, the 
5 internet, and cybersecurity. 
6 Said committee shall report to the General Court the results of its investigation and study 
7 and its recommendations, if any, together with drafts of legislation necessary to carry such 
8 recommendations into effect, by filing the same with the Clerk of the House of Representatives 
9 on or before December 31, 2024.
