HOUSE . . . . . . No. 4603 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________________ 
 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
_______________________ 
 
 
REPORT 
of the 
SPECIAL JOINT 
COMMITTEE 
on 
INITIATIVE PETITIONS 
on the 
INITIATIVE PETITION 
of 
DIANA DIZOGLIO 
AND OTHERS 
FOR THE PASSAGE OF AN ACT 
EXPRESSLY AUTHORIZING THE AUDITOR 
TO AUDIT THE LEGISLATURE (see House, No. 4251) 
_______________________ 
 
April 30, 2024. 
_______________________ 
 
MAJORITY REPORT. 
 
 A majority of the Special Joint Committee on Initiative Petitions (“The 
Committee”) recommends that the Initiative Petition 23-34, House 4251, “An Act 
expressly authorizing the Auditor to audit the Legislature,” (“the Initiative Petition”) as 
currently drafted and presented to this Committee, OUGHT NOT TO BE ENACTED BY 
THE LEGISLATURE AT THIS TIME. 
 
The purpose of this report is to provide a recommendation to the full legislature on 
whether to accept the Initiative Petition as written for consideration and enactment. 
 
The proposed Initiative Petitions would give the Auditor authority to audit the finances 
and workings of the state legislature. 
 
Testimony 
 
The Committee heard from experienced professionals, proponents and opponents of the 
Initiative Petition, as well as members of the general public. 
 
The Committee first heard testimony from experienced professionals. Christopher 
Rogers, CPA and Managing Principal, State and Local Government at the accounting 
firm CliftonLarsonAllen LLC, testified that his firm conducted audits of the 
Massachusetts House and Senate. He was followed by the Comptroller of the 
Commonwealth, William McNamara, who explained the responsibilities of his office 
including the administration of the Commonwealth’s Financial Records Transparency 
Program. The Committee then heard from two academics. David C. King, Senior 
Lecturer in Public Policy at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government, and Jeremy 
Paul, Professor of Law at Northeastern University, provided testimony relating to the 
constitutional issues raised by the Initiative Petition 
 
The Auditor, Diana DiZoglio, testified in support of the Initiative Petition as did a panel 
consisting of former Representative Daniel Winslow, Mary Connaughton of the Pioneer 
Institute, and Paul Craney of Massachusetts Fiscal Alliance. 
 
Former Auditor Suzanne Bump and Jerold J. Duquette, Professor of Political Science at 
Central Connecticut State University, testified in opposition to the amendment. 
 
Conclusion 
 
The statutory change would undermine the well-contemplated balance of constitutional 
powers between the branches of government as established by the framers of the 
Constitution of the Commonwealth. As David C. King, Senior Lecturer in Public Policy 
at the Harvard Kennedy School and Faculty Chair of Harvard’s Bi-Partisan Program for 
Newly Elected Members of the U.S. Congress, testified during The Committee’s public 
hearing “. . . I want to warn voters and this Legislature that House 4251 is exceptionally 
unwise . . . the Massachusetts separation of powers became foundational for our national 
constitution. The Auditor’s proposal chips away at this foundation. I do believe it is that 
dire. The Auditor is proposing an unprecedented transfer of power from the people’s 
representatives into the Executive Branch.” 
 
The Office of the State Auditor is a member of the Executive Branch of the government 
of the Commonwealth. Both the United States Constitution and the Massachusetts 
Constitution enshrine the separation of powers among the three branches of government, 
while creating various checks and balances on those powers. What this Initiative Petition 
seeks to do, however, is to transfer, by statute, authority explicitly vested by the 
constitution in the legislative branch, not to the electorate, but to the executive branch 
thereby violating the foundational constitutional principle of separation of powers. As 
Jeremy R. Paul, Professor of Law at Northeastern University, stated in testimony 
submitted to The Committee “I believe there are strong reasons to conclude that it would 
be such an overreach and thus there is a significant likelihood that Massachusetts courts 
would be forced to invalidate a statute adopted by the Initiative Petition that tracks the 
current language.” 
 
Notably, a recent action taken by the Trial Court supports the conclusion that the 
Auditor’s proposed audit of the General Court would violate the separation of powers 
established in the Massachusetts Constitution. In a letter sent to the Office of the State 
Auditor on August 24, 2023, the Trial Court wrote that it was declining to continue 
responding to requests related to an audit of the Trial Court’s Office of Jury 
Commissioner. Although the Trial Court, like the General Court, is a part of a separate 
branch of government from the Auditor and therefore not subject to the Auditor’s 
authority, it nevertheless consented to the Auditor’s request for an audit. It was only after 
the Auditor unilaterally expanded the scope of her audit that the Trial Court rescinded its 
consent, making clear that the Auditor had exceeded her authority and violated the 
separation of powers principle. 
 
In a representative democracy, power rests with the constituents who elect their 
Representatives and Senators and hold them accountable. Rather than achieve its stated 
goals, the proposed the Initiative Petition would limit the power of the voters who elect 
Members of the Legislature by expanding the powers of the Executive Branch; 
essentially, the Auditor would supplant the people for herself in holding the Legislature 
accountable. In fact, a member of the panel that testified in support of the Initiative 
Petition, former Representative Dan Winslow, indicated that if the Initiative Petition was 
approved by voters, it would most likely be challenged on constitutional grounds, as the 
language is overly broad. He went on to suggest that the Legislature should change the 
Initiative Petition, so it did not “intrude on core legislative functions.” 
 
It is for these reasons that the Commonwealth’s chief law enforcement officer, Attorney 
General Andrea Campbell, in evaluating the Auditor’s assertion of authority to audit all 
functions of the legislative branch, declared that the proposal “raise[d] separation of 
powers issues” and “constitutional concerns” about impermissible interference with or 
encroachment on “powers uniquely granted to the Legislature.” 
 
The House and Senate, under their individual governing rules, require a yearly financial 
audit conducted by an independent auditing firm. These audit reports are available to the 
public. 
 
The Legislature’s financial records and accounts are available on the Commonwealth’s 
Financial Records Transparency Platform (“CTHRU”), administered by William 
McNamara, Comptroller of the Commonwealth, who testified at The Committee’s public 
hearing. CTHRU includes detailed and comprehensive information regarding payroll, 
expenditures, and other financial information, including the amounts paid to state 
vendors. Additionally, all legislative sessions and committee hearings are live-streamed 
and recorded and can be found on the General Court’s website. Access to information 
about all bills and amendments, including roll call votes and journals and calendars from 
the House and Senate are also available online. 
As part of her testimony in support of the Initiative Petition, Auditor DiZoglio shared a 
visual representation of documents she described as past audits to claim precedent exists 
for auditing the Legislature. However, further research established that 74 of those 113 
audits (many of which date back to the 19 th century) were mere financial accounting 
reports similar to what is now publicly available on the Comptroller’s CTHRU website. 
The remainder are the financial statements of specific divisions within the Legislature. As 
Attorney General Campell has stated, despite the existence of numerous Auditor’s reports 
on certain discrete activities or entities within the legislative branch, there is “no 
historical precedent at all for the type of audit the [Auditor] seeks to conduct now: a 
sweeping audit of the Legislature over its objection, which would include review of many 
of its core legislative functions.” 
 
The majority of The Committee notes that the Auditor, during her campaign and in public 
statements, has frequently cited perceived political mistreatment in the Legislature. 
Suzanne Bump, former Auditor of the Commonwealth, testified that the proper subject of 
government audits are government programs authorized by the Legislature to serve 
public purposes, not the functions of the legislative branch of government. As Bump 
stated, because the Massachusetts Constitution enables the Legislature to govern itself 
through its own rules and procedures, there are no objective criteria by which the Auditor 
can assess it; such an audit would be inherently subjective and thus inconsistent with 
well-established auditing standards. In addition, Auditor DiZoglio lacks the objectivity 
required to audit the Legislature in accordance with the Generally Accepted Government 
Auditing Standards (GAGAS), also known as the Yellow Book, due to the Auditor’s 
recent service in the Legislature, as well as the clear prejudice that the Auditor has 
publicly expressed against the Legislature. 
 
For these reasons, we, the majority of the Special Joint Committee on Initiative Petitions, 
recommend that “An Act expressly authorizing the Auditor to audit the Legislature” (see 
House No. 4251) as currently drafted and presented to this Committee, OUGHT NOT TO 
BE ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE AT THIS TIME. 
 
Senators. Representatives. 
 
Cindy F. Friedman Alice Hanlon Peisch 
Paul R. Feeney Michael S. Day 
Jason M. Lewis Kenneth I. Gordon
