HOUSE . . . . . . No. 4607 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________________ 
 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
_______________________ 
 
 
REPORT 
of the 
SPECIAL JOINT 
COMMITTEE 
on 
INITIATIVE PETITIONS 
on the 
INITIATIVE PETITION 
of 
SARKO GERGERIAN 
AND OTHERS 
FOR THE PASSAGE OF AN ACT 
RELATIVE TO THE REGULATION AND TAXATION OF 
NATURAL PSYCHEDELIC SUBSTANCES 
(see House, No. 4255) 
_______________________ 
 
April 30, 2024. 
_______________________ 
MAJORITY REPORT. 
 
 A majority of the Special Joint Committee on Initiative Petitions (“The 
Committee”) recommends that the Initiative Petition 23-13, House 4255, “An Initiative 
Petition for a Law Relative to the Regulation and Taxation of Natural Psychedelic 
Substance,” (“the Initiative Petition”) as currently drafted and presented to this 
Committee, OUGHT NOT TO BE ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE AT THIS 
TIME. 
 
The purpose of this report is to provide a recommendation to the full legislature on 
whether to accept the Initiative Petition as written for consideration and enactment. 
 
The proposed Initiative Petition would permit persons aged 21 or over to grow, possess 
and use specified natural psychedelic substances in the Commonwealth in certain 
circumstances. It would also permit the sale of these substances at approved locations for 
use under the supervision of a licensed facilitator and subject to regulations to be 
promulgated by a newly created Natural Psychedelic Substances Commission in 
consultation with a newly created Natural Psychedelic Substances Advisory Board. 
“Permitted psychedelic substances” include two substances found in mushrooms 
(psilocybin and psilocyn) and three found in plants (dimethyltryptamine, mescaline, and 
ibogaine). The Initiative Petition would also establish a tax rate for the sale of these 
substances by licensed facilitators. The manufacture, distribution, dispensation, and 
possession of these substances remain – and would remain – illegal federally. 
 
Testimony 
 
The Committee heard from experienced professionals, proponents and opponents of the 
Initiative Petition, as well as members of the general public. 
 
Subject matter experts included doctors currently studying the effects of psychedelic 
treatments on patients, including Dr. Jerrold Rosenbaum, Psychiatrist-in-Chief Emeritus, 
Director of the Center for the Neuroscience of Psychedelics at Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Dr. Franklin King of Harvard University and Director of Training and 
Education at the Center for the Neuroscience of Psychedelics at Massachusetts General 
Hospital, and Dr. Yvan Gersaint of Dana Farber Cancer Institute. Each doctor cited 
potential benefits to the use of psychedelic agents as evidenced in their clinical studies, 
showing psychological benefits that are as effective, or even more so, than available 
therapeutics, with toxicity and risk seeming modest compared to available 
pharmaceutical drugs. While addiction to psychedelics is unlikely, the doctors testified 
that there are regulatory and logistical challenges to improving clinical studies around 
psychedelics. The doctors also pointed to issues of psychedelic use exacerbating 
psychosis in individuals with conditions that cause psychosis. 
 
Angie Allbee, Manager of the Oregon Psilocybin Services Section of the Oregon Health 
Authority, testified on the legal and regulatory framework of psilocybin in the state of 
Oregon following its passage in the November 2020 election and stated that she takes no 
position on House 4255. In Oregon, there is no residency requirement, and anyone over 
the age of 21 may access psilocybin after completing a preparation session. There are 
four types of licenses: manufacturer, laboratory, service center (where sessions take 
place), and facilitator (those who support clients through a nondirective approach to 
psilocybin). As of the date of the hearing, Oregon had awarded 9 manufacturer, 2 
laboratory, 23 service center, and 276 facilitator licenses, with 5,697 products sold to 
clients from January 2023 to March 2024. When asked to compare Oregon’s framework 
and the proposed Massachusetts framework as laid out in this Initiative Petition, Ms. 
Allbee stated that Oregon’s decriminalization has been scaled back and there is no 
personal cultivation allowed in Oregon. 
 
Matthew Johnson, Ph.D., the Susan Hill Ward Professor in Psychedelics and 
Consciousness at Johns Hopkins University, also presented testimony as a subject matter 
expert. He testified that he has published highly cited research on the risks of 
psychedelics and safety guidelines. Dr. Johnson has found that people using psychedelics 
can have intense, severe reactions, but can generally be reassured by people they trust. 
Dr. Johnson highlighted statistics around the impact of psychedelics, showing lower 
magnitude in harm, emergency room visits, poison control calls, and addiction compared 
to opioid, alcohol, and cocaine use, but noted that most of the harm comes around 
cardiovascular challenges. Dr. Johnson further testified that while psychedelic use should 
not be encouraged, the criminal penalties are incongruent with the danger of these 
substances and proposed that regulated use should come with clear public health 
warnings about what separates riskier use from less risky use: dosage, supervision, 
medical and mental health contraindications, dangers of public intoxication, and the 
dangers of unethical practitioners. Dr. Johnson also added that the potential therapeutic 
benefits are likely less if not provided in the presence of mental health professionals and 
that it is important to collect data of psychedelic use if it is legalized. 
 
A panel of proponents of the Initiative Petition described how psilocybin has allowed 
them to personally process trauma from their experiences in the military and police force, 
citing many personal stories of veterans and police officers. 
 
Members of the public testifying on behalf of Bay Staters for Natural Medicine indicated 
their support for the legalization of psychedelics, but requested the Legislature propose a 
substitute to the Initiative Petition for the November 2024 ballot. The proposed substitute, 
which contains several stark differences in scope from the Initiative Petition would likely 
conflict with the precedent set by the Supreme Judicial Court in the 1976 case, Buckley v. 
Secretary of the Commonwealth, which noted that the intent of the framers of Article 
XLVIII of the Amendments to the Constitution was for the Legislature to provide minor 
technical changes to an Initiative Petition. 
 
Opponents to the Initiative Petition included Dr. John A. Fromson, Psychiatrist at 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, and Dr. Nassir Ghaemi, Professor of Psychiatry at Tufts 
University School of Medicine, who serve as President and President-elect, respectively, 
of the Massachusetts Psychiatric Society. The doctors described the clinical, logistical, 
and safety concerns of this Initiative Petition, including that the Federal Drug 
Administration (FDA) has not approved any drug containing psilocybin, there is not a 
strong enough framework to guarantee safety for patients or providers. The doctors 
further testified that this Initiative Petition contemplates combining three issues – overall 
wellness of the general public, treatment of psychiatric disorders, and use of psilocybin 
for spiritual use –into one initiative, which, in their opinion, is reckless, irresponsible and 
dangerous to the public. While the doctors recognized that there is currently promising 
research relating to the use of psilocybin by veterans being treated by the Veterans 
Administration, that research is still in study phases. They also noted that the 
Massachusetts Psychiatric Society has many outstanding questions regarding the impacts 
this Initiative Petition would have on providers, including insurance coverage, and the 
impact to specific population subsets such as maternal or perinatal health. The doctors 
further explained their opposition by noting the broad nature of this Initiative Petition, the 
lack of concrete research or results from states that have legalized psilocybin, and the 
interplay of psilocybin (a hallucinogen) with psychosis for those suffering from 
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and unipolar disorder. 
 
Conclusion 
 
While psychedelic plants have been used around the world and through time in spiritual 
and religious practices, their scientific study in the United States began primarily in the 
20th century and the federal government largely proscribed the use of psychedelic 
substances in 1968. However, the use of these substances continued in the decades 
following, and law enforcement agencies around the country have reported a nearly four-
fold increase in the overall weight of hallucinogenic mushrooms seized between 2017- 
2022. This growth in use has led to a new, heightened period of medical and scientific 
research which is still developing. 
 
Published studies have indicated that, as users take measured doses under therapeutic 
supervision, the use of psychedelic substances may be highly effective in addressing a 
variety of adverse mental health conditions. The Committee specifically recognizes the 
importance of the potential for positive treatment results in populations seeking help for 
post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety, and other mental health problems and 
credits the testimony it received from individuals from our veteran and first responder 
population. These promising findings, however, have not provided evidence that the 
widescale recreational legalization of these substances would be beneficial, let alone safe. 
 
The Committee finds that the petition’s major goals — licensure and decriminalization — 
likely undercut each other by creating two separate systems for the use of psychedelic 
substances. The petition would both create a system of state-licensed and taxed 
therapeutic facilities on the one hand and, on the other, decriminalize the cultivation, 
possession, and distribution of a variety of hallucinogenic and psychoactive substances. 
Voters are, therefore, being asked to simultaneously establish a potentially costly 
licensure system that imposes regulations on the cultivation methods, quality of product 
and allowable means of engaging certain users, while at the same time making the same 
substances widely available for individual cultivation and use across the Commonwealth 
in a non-licensed manner. 
 
The petition would allow Massachusetts residents to carry many doses of psychoactive 
mushrooms on their person or in their home at one time. It therefore presumably allows 
an unlicensed cultivator to “gift” individuals certain doses and is silent on the ability of 
cultivators to charge for overseeing that use or guiding the user through the psychedelic 
experience. The Committee finds that this loophole would likely subvert the safety 
regulations imposed on licensed facilitators by permitting the growth of an unregulated, 
unlicensed marketplace. 
 
Similar to the model the Commonwealth uses to regulate the sale of marijuana, the 
petition would require licensed providers to rely on a cash-based system due to its 
illegality at the federal level. The petition also would require municipalities to zone for 
and to permit these licensed facilities while capping their ability to levy a tax rate it 
determines appropriate to manage traffic, local ordinances, inspections, and any increased 
calls requesting the assistance of law enforcement or medical professionals. 
 
For these reasons, we, the majority of the Special Joint Committee on Initiative Petitions, 
recommend that “An Initiative Petition for a Law Relative to the Regulation and Taxation 
of Natural Psychedelic Substance” (see House No. 4255) as currently drafted and 
presented to this Committee, OUGHT NOT TO BE ENACTED BY THE 
LEGISLATURE AT THIS TIME. 
 
 
 
Senators. Representatives. 
 
Cindy F. Friedman Alice Hanlon Peisch 
Paul R. Feeney Michael S. Day 
Jason M. Lewis Kenneth I. Gordon 
Ryan C. Fattman David T. Vieira
