HOUSE . . . . . . No. 4611 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________________ 
 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
_______________________ 
 
 
REPORT 
of the 
SPECIAL JOINT 
COMMITTEE 
on 
INITIATIVE PETITIONS 
on the 
INITIATIVE PETITION 
of 
CHARLES DEWEY ELLISON, III 
AND OTHERS 
FOR THE PASSAGE OF AN ACT 
ESTABLISHING THAT APP-BASED DRIVERS ARE NOT EMPLOYEES, 
AND NETWORK COMPANIES ARE NOT EMPLOYERS, 
FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES OF THE GENERAL LAWS 
(see House, No. 4259) 
_______________________ 
 
April 30, 2024. 
_______________________ 
MAJORITY REPORT. 
 
 A majority of the Special Joint Committee on Initiative Petitions (“The 
Committee”), recommends that Initiative Petition No. 23-25, House 4256; Initiative 
Petition No. 23-29, House 4257; Initiative Petition No. 23-30, House 4258; Initiative 
Petition No. 23-31, House 4259; and Initiative Petition No. 23-32, House 4260, (“the 
Initiative Petitions”) as currently drafted and presented to this Committee, OUGHT NOT 
TO BE ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE AT THIS TIME 
 
The purpose of this report is to provide a recommendation to the full legislature on 
whether to accept the Initiative Petitions as written for consideration and enactment. 
 
The five Initiative Petitions would all similarly declare Transportation Network Drivers 
and Delivery Network Drivers (“Drivers”) as independent contractors when engaging 
with Transportation Network Companies and Delivery Network Companies 
(“Companies”). The five Initiative Petitions differ in legal mechanisms to achieve this 
and the scale and scope of the type of benefits Drivers would receive, from no additional 
work benefits to Drivers to creating a new class of benefits for these Drivers. 
 
Testimony 
 
The Committee heard from experienced professionals, proponents and opponents, as well 
as members of the general public. 
 
Patrick Moore, First Assistant Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, 
testified as a subject matter expert on the five Initiative Petitions. First Assistant Attorney 
General Moore gave a brief overview of each Initiative Petition as follows: 
 
House 4257 and House 4260 were referred to as “bare bones” Initiative Petitions that 
similarly define Drivers as not employees, and Companies as not employers. 
 
House 4257 specifies that Drivers who accept requests through an online enabled 
application are not employees for purposes of certain Massachusetts labor and 
employment laws, specifically those governing wage and hours, workplace conditions, 
workers’ compensation, and unemployment insurance. The Initiative Petition would also 
specify that Companies are not employers for the purposes of those laws. 
 
House 4260 also specifies that Drivers are not employees for purposes of certain 
Massachusetts employment laws, and that Companies are not employers. It would 
accomplish this in a slightly different manner than House 4257 by amending applicable 
statutes to specifically exempt Drivers, including Massachusetts General Laws (“G.L.”) 
Chapter 149 Section 148B, which governs wage and hour laws and workplace conditions, 
Chapter 151A which governs unemployment insurance, and Chapter 152 which governs 
workers’ compensation. 
 
The three remaining Initiative Petitions achieve the same objective of clarifying that 
Drivers are not employees and Companies are not employers, but also require Companies 
to provide minimum compensation and benefit terms to the Drivers. 
 
House 4258 is similar to House 4257 with compensation and benefit terms added to it. 
This Initiative Petition establishes baseline contract terms between Drivers and 
Companies and sets forth certain defined minimum and benefit terms. Beginning with the 
compensation, Drivers would be assured a base compensation equal to 120 per cent of the 
Massachusetts minimum wage for time spent getting to or completing ride or delivery 
requests. Drivers would also be entitled to per mile compensation for that time beginning 
at 28¢ per mile. The law would require that increases in compensation be tied to any 
future annual increases of the state minimum wage and for the Executive Office of Labor 
and Workforce Development to increase the per mile compensation by the percentage 
increase in the state minimum wage, if any. If the earnings for a Driver fall below the 
minimum compensation amount, the Company must pay the Driver the difference 
between what the Driver earned and the minimum compensation amount. The baseline 
contract terms provide for certain defined benefits for Drivers, including a limited 
healthcare stipend, paid sick time related to hours driven, and certain private occupational 
accident insurance benefits. The Initiative Petition would prohibit covered companies 
from discriminatory practices and grant Drivers the opportunity to appeal a termination. 
 
House 4259 amends G.L. Chapter 149 and Chapter 151A like House 4260 but creates 
contract terms between Drivers and Companies similar to those in House 4258. 
 
House 4256 has the broadest classification provision. The initiative would specify that 
Drivers are not employees for any purpose whatsoever under Massachusetts law and that 
Companies are not employers for any purpose whatsoever under Massachusetts law. Like 
the two prior Initiative Petitions, it would then create baseline contract terms between 
Drivers and Companies and set forth certain defined minimum compensation and 
benefits. The wages and benefits are similar to those set forth in the prior two Initiative 
Petitions. Like those Initiative Petitions, Companies would be prohibited from 
discriminatory practices and must grant Drivers the opportunity to appeal a termination. 
 
First Assistant Attorney General Moore also noted that there are currently legal 
challenges to all five of these Initiative Petitions with plaintiffs asserting that the 
Attorney General incorrectly certified the Initiative Petitions on the basis that the 
Initiative Petitions violate the “single subject” provision of Article XLVIII of the 
Amendments to the Constitution. Additionally, the relationship between Drivers and 
Companies is the subject of a lawsuit from the Attorney General’s Office, beginning 
under then-Attorney General Healey. This lawsuit contemplates whether under the 
current Massachusetts Wage Act and the “ABC Test” definition of an employer-
employee relationship, Drivers should be considered employees and Companies 
considered employers. First Assistant Attorney General Moore testified that if the 
Supreme Judicial Court rules that Drivers are employees under current statute, the 
Attorney General’s Office would be able to pursue lost wages and benefits for these 
Drivers from the Companies they worked for. The five Initiative Petitions, if any pass, 
would end any prospective application of the decision should the Supreme Judicial Court 
declare that Drivers are to be classified as employees. 
 
Subject matter experts from academia and policy institutions provided testimony on the 
history of employment law, including the increase in the use of independent contractors 
in the 1970s, approaches to employment law in other jurisdictions such as California and 
the European Union, and relevant industry statistics concerning Drivers and Companies. 
 
Dr. Hilary Robinson, Associate Professor of Law and Sociology at Northeastern 
University, testified that through these proposals, the Companies are claiming to be a 
“protected class” that should be exempt from several statutes that govern relationships 
between employers and employees and provide worker protections and benefits. Dr. 
Robinson further testified that in her analysis of California’s laws pertaining to this issue, 
classifying Drivers as employees did not impact flexibility or patterns of work, and that 
the Companies, as they do now, retained control over what work Drivers have access to 
perform, contradicting the claim that this model needs Drivers to be independent 
contractors for successful operation and flexibility for Drivers. She also testified that in 
her opinion, none of these five Initiative Petitions should be presented on the ballot, as 
voters will not have the necessary information or background to make a truly informed 
decision. 
 
Further testimony from Dr. Veena Dubal, Professor of Law at the University of 
California, Irvine, stated that evidence has shown that the passage of Proposition 22, 
which classifies Drivers as independent contractors in California and which contains 
similar provisions as the five Initiative Petitions before us, has shown to have a negative 
impact on Drivers, with 40-60 per cent of Drivers’ work uncompensated and Drivers 
netting an average of $6.20 per hour, compared to the state minimum wage of $16 an 
hour. Dr. Dubal presented the results of a study showing that two-thirds of Drivers, many 
of whom have made a significant capital investment in their work as Drivers, have been 
terminated or had their account deactivated at some point, with 18 per cent losing their 
vehicle and 12 per cent losing their housing as a result. Dr. Dubal went on to show the 
occupational danger Drivers face, citing research showing gig workers are found to suffer 
the highest rate of on-the-job fatalities and 67 per cent of Drivers have reported instances 
of violence, harassment, or abuse while driving. 
 
A third subject matter expert, Liya Palagashvili, Senior Research Fellow at the Mercatus 
Center at George Mason University, highlighted the benefits for workers who enjoy the 
flexibility of the current model. In Ms. Palagashvili’s opinion, attempts to classify or 
regulate gig workers as employees are counterproductive because 90 per cent of jobs in 
2020 were traditional, W-2 jobs, while the gig economy is designed for people who are 
hoping to earn supplemental income in a flexible manner. Ms. Palagashvili stated that a 
study in the aftermath of Assembly Bill 5, a California policy declaring Drivers as 
employees, showed no consistent evidence that W-2 employment increased and a 
significant decline not only in self-employment but overall employment as well for 
affected occupations in California, matching studies of anecdotal findings from the New 
York Times and the Los Angeles Times. Ms. Palagashvili further testified that, in her 
opinion, the best policy to pursue would be to enhance access to benefits while 
maintaining the ability for gig work to persist as supplemental and flexible work. When 
asked by the Committee, Ms. Palagashvili indicated that while the majority of Uber 
Drivers have health insurance, she was unsure if the insurance was private or state-
funded, since Companies cannot provide health insurance benefits to Drivers due to their 
status as independent contractors. 
 
Two panels spoke as proponents in favor of the Initiative Petitions. The first panel 
consisted of two Drivers, one who drives for Uber and Lyft, and another who drives for 
Instacart, as well as two local industry representatives. The panelists emphasized the 
flexibility and control over the schedule that the independent contractor model affords 
Drivers, and how reliant communities are on the services that Drivers provide, 
highlighting those in Gateway Communities, rural areas, and the elderly. The Drivers on 
this panel stated that these jobs provided the income and the flexible scheduling 
necessary to have control over their lives, and shared that like any industry, the rideshare 
business is not for every prospective worker. The panel cited data from an industry-poll 
that found that 75 per cent of Drivers year after year prefer being independent 
contractors, and that more than 80 per cent of Drivers drive 15 hours or less a week. 
When asked, the two Drivers on the panel stated that one received Social Security 
benefits and the other received health insurance through MassHealth, but neither has a 
W-2 job. 
 
The second panel of proponents consisted of representatives from the Companies of 
Uber, Lyft, DoorDash, and Instacart testifying in support of the five Initiative Petitions. 
This panel discussed the benefits their platforms provide for customers, Drivers, and 
small businesses, “who all use their platforms to grow and thrive”. This panel specifically 
mentioned achieving the policy goal of flexibility and benefits for Drivers. The panelists 
testified that the employee-employer laws do not prohibit flexible, on-demand 
scheduling, but that the framework of such a model would not be feasible for the 
Companies. Pointing to data, the panel shared that 80 per cent of Drivers on the Instacart 
platform wish to remain independent contractors, and on average Instacart Drivers work 
less than 10 hours a week, with many Drivers using it for supplemental income. Uber 
pointed to statistics that Drivers on the platform earn on average $28.96 per utilized hour, 
and that the overwhelming majority of de-platforming occurs because drivers come out of 
compliance with the stricter laws in Massachusetts that currently regulate Companies. 
During questioning from the Committee, this panel noted that the proposed regulatory 
framework would align deactivation standards, and that the taxicab industry also operates 
in an independent contractor framework. Additionally, the panelists testified that 
Companies could decide to pull operations out of the Commonwealth if Drivers were to 
be classified as employees whether through court decisions or the Initiative Petitions 
failing, similar to the decision to end operations in Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minnesota 
due to a mandated increase in minimum fares for Drivers in those Cities. 
 
The panel shared that the Companies will plan to move forward to the ballot with just one 
of the five proposed Initiative Petitions, but their preference is for a legislative 
compromise and to avoid the ballot box altogether, as was accomplished in Washington 
state. 
 
There were three panels of opponents who testified against all five Initiative Petitions. 
The first panel consisted of two representatives from the International Brotherhood of 
Teamsters, including the President of Teamsters Local 25 and the States Legislative 
Director. This panel testified that the eyes of the labor movement across the country are 
on Massachusetts, specifically to see if the Companies will succeed in watering down the 
employment laws that are already on the books in statute. This panel’s concern was that if 
the Companies are able to accomplish this in Massachusetts, they will be able to exploit 
laws across the country. The Teamsters shared the position that the traditional employee-
employer model should be respected and properly enforced, and they oppose any 
proposal that offers a third model to classify workers and ultimately weakens 
employment standards. The panel not only noted their belief that Companies are currently 
misclassifying Drivers as independent contractors, enabling wage theft and essentially 
taxpayer subsidization of these companies, but that these Initiative Petitions have 
implications beyond the app-based work of Uber and Lyft. 
 
A second panel of opponents consisted of representatives from the Massachusetts AFL-
CIO, the Massachusetts Building Trades Council, and the California Labor Federation. 
This panel stated that the strong employment laws of the Commonwealth are built on the 
base assumption that workers are employees entitled to numerous benefits. In their 
opinion, Big Tech companies cannot be trusted, as they have actively skirted the law, 
“lining their own pockets,” and are now offering benefits that are far below the minimum 
standard that employees are entitled to. The panel noted that Massachusetts has no 
carveout currently to the ABC test and Massachusetts law goes even further by offsetting 
federal carveouts to the ABC test. Additionally, the panel shared that misclassification of 
workers has been rampant in the trades, where Companies are incorrectly classifying 
employees as independent contractors to avoid providing benefits. The panel remarked 
that there is no need to sacrifice hard-won rights that workers have fought for to simply 
line the pockets of tech companies and additionally shared that California found gig 
workers to be employees under every state employee-employer test. The panel 
highlighted the irony of the campaign for Proposition 22 to remove the employee 
designation of Drivers in California, which was run at the onset of the COVID-19 
pandemic, when Drivers did not have access to masks, vaccines, air shields, sick time, or 
death benefits. 
 
The last panel of opponents consisted of a representative from the Massachusetts 
Coalition for Occupational Safety and Health, a rider who was permanently injured while 
in a rideshare vehicle, and a Driver. This panel echoed the sentiments of previous 
opposition panels by saying that Companies are misclassifying workers and added that 
this is to the detriment of worker earnings, benefits, and even safety, as Companies are 
not forced to comply with OSHA regulations. Through this misclassification, Companies 
have avoided responsibility for their workers, including workers’ compensation and death 
benefits for Drivers. The rider who was injured in an Uber ride in 2021, testified that 
Uber has refused to face him in court, and that its insurance policy only covered seven 
months of his continuing care, where his prescriptions cost $9,000 a month. The rider 
noted that the Companies’ “shotgun pellet approach,” — starting with nine Initiative 
Petitions, then whittling down to five Initiative Petitions — hoping just one Initiative 
Petition can beat the legal challenges so they can shirk responsibility for actions taken by 
their Drivers. The Driver on the panel, who has driven for Lyft since 2013 just a few days 
after the platform was live in Massachusetts, questioned the data and statistics that the 
Companies shared. In the Driver’s experience, Drivers do not have control over their 
work, which is unlike independent contractor work. The Driver also stated that she was 
deactivated from the platform after speaking out against the Company. 
 
Conclusion 
 
These Initiative Petitions elicit multifaceted public policy questions regarding the 
fundamental nature of the employer-employee relationship and the individual terms 
governing that relationship. The Committee is also cognizant of legal challenges 
regarding these initiative petitions that are to be argued before the Supreme Judicial 
Court in the month of May 2024, after the constitutional deadline that the legislature can 
enact these initiative petitions. This timeline adds further complexity to the question of 
enactment. 
 
The testimony heard by the Committee showed an overall lack of consensus on the merits 
or issues raised by the initiative petitions. The Committee feels that any action on this 
subject must strike a balance between existing employee rights and protection, and the 
need to ensure that TNCs can continue to operate, which they maintain would not be 
possible if Drivers were not classified as independent contractors. 
 
Particularly salient is the petitioners’ assertion that the drivers will lose flexibility if the 
Companies are not able to lawfully classify them as independent contractors. Drivers who 
testified before the Committee focused on the importance of flexibility and the benefit of 
being able to work whenever they choose. However, proponents did not provide an 
answer as to why work-hours flexibility would be impossible to provide regardless of 
employment status. Massachusetts law currently does not limit the flexibility that 
employers can offer to their employees. 
 
For these reasons, given the legal and other uncertainties surrounding these initiatives, 
we, the undersigned members of the Special Joint Committee on Initiative Petitions, 
recommend that House No. 4257, House No. 4260, House No. 4258, House No. 4259, 
and House No. 4256, as currently drafted and presented to this Committee, OUGHT NOT 
TO BE ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE AT THIS TIME. 
 
Senators. Representatives. 
 
Cindy F. Friedman Alice Hanlon Peisch 
Paul R. Feeney Michael S. Day 
Jason M. Lewis Kenneth I. Gordon 
Ryan C. Fattman David T. Vieira
