HOUSE . . . . . . . No. 4701 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
______________________________________ 
 
 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, May 30, 2024. 
 
The committee on Ways and Means, to whom was referred the Bill 
authorizing the commissioner of Capital Asset Management and 
Maintenance to convey a certain parcel of land in the town of Lancaster 
(House, No. 4300), reports recommending that the same ought to pass 
with an amendment substituting therefor the accompanying bill (House, 
No. 4701) [Local Approval Received]. 
 
For the committee, 
 
AARON MICHLEWITZ. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 5 
 FILED ON: 5/30/2024 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4701 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________ 
In the One Hundred and Ninety-Third General Court 
(2023-2024) 
_______________ 
 
An Act authorizing the commissioner of Capital Asset Management and Maintenance to convey 
certain parcels of land in the town of Lancaster. 
 
 Whereas, The deferred operation of this act would tend to defeat its purpose, which is to 
authorize forthwith the conveyance by the commonwealth of certain parcels in the town of 
Lancaster, therefore it is hereby declared to be an emergency law, necessary for the immediate 
preservation of the public convenience. 
 
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by the authority 
of the same, as follows: 
 
1 SECTION 1. (a) Notwithstanding sections 33 to 37, inclusive, of chapter 7C of the 
2 General Laws or any other general or special law to the contrary, the commissioner of capital 
3 asset management and maintenance may convey certain parcels of land in the town of Lancaster 
4 owned by the commonwealth to the town of Lancaster subject to this act. The parcels to be 
5 conveyed were formerly known as the Lancaster Industrial School for Girls and are described in 
6 deeds recorded in the Worcester registry of deeds in: (i) book 639, page 254; (ii) book 639, page 
7 255; (iii) book 549, page 192; (iv) book 549, page 194; and (v) book 2642, page 485, and may 
8 include, without limitation, the area known as the piggery; provided, however, that the 
9 commissioner shall not convey to the town of Lancaster the area leased to Robert F. Kennedy 
10 Community Alliance, Inc. pursuant to chapter 185 of the acts of 2000. 
2 of 5 
11 (b) The use of the parcels to be conveyed to the town of Lancaster pursuant to subsection 
12 (a) shall not be restricted to use for municipal or other specific purposes; provided, however, that 
13 the town may so restrict the use of 1 or more of the parcels at a later date, in accordance with any 
14 applicable general or special law. The parcels shall be conveyed by deed without warranties or 
15 representations by the commonwealth. 
16 SECTION 2. As consideration for the conveyance of the parcels described in section 1, 
17 the town of Lancaster shall pay the commonwealth $1. 
18 SECTION 3. If the town of Lancaster sells or leases any portion of the parcels described 
19 in section 1, the net proceeds from such sale or lease, as determined by the town of Lancaster and 
20 agreed to by the commissioner of capital asset management and maintenance, shall be allocated 
21 between the town of Lancaster and the commonwealth in equal shares; provided, however, that 
22 the commissioner of capital asset management and maintenance may agree to reduce the 
23 commonwealth’s share of net proceeds to not less than 40 per cent in order to provide certain 
24 incentives to the town of Lancaster to sell or lease the parcels expeditiously. If the net proceeds, 
25 as so determined, is a negative amount, the commonwealth shall not be required to make any 
26 payments to the town of Lancaster. 
27 SECTION 4. (a) If the town of Lancaster decides to retain all, or any portion, of the 
28 parcels described in section 1 for municipal purposes, the town shall give written notice of such 
29 decision to the commissioner of capital asset management and maintenance and shall pay the 
30 commonwealth additional consideration for the portion or portions of the parcels retained by the 
31 town of Lancaster for municipal purposes. Such additional consideration shall be the fair market 
32 value of the portion or portions of the parcels retained by the town of Lancaster for municipal 
3 of 5 
33 purposes as determined by the commissioner of capital asset management and maintenance 
34 based upon an independent professional appraisal, taking into consideration the restriction on the 
35 use of the portion or portions of the parcels to be retained by the town of Lancaster pursuant to 
36 this section. 
37 (b) The commissioner of capital asset management and maintenance shall submit any 
38 appraisal required pursuant to subsection (a) to the inspector general for review and comment. 
39 The inspector general shall review and approve the appraisal and the review shall include an 
40 examination of the methodology utilized for the appraisal. The inspector general shall prepare a 
41 report and file the report with the commissioner of capital asset management and maintenance. 
42 The commissioner shall submit copies of the appraisal, and the inspector general’s review and 
43 approval and comments, if any, to the house and senate committees on ways and means and the 
44 joint committee on state administration and regulatory oversight not less than 15 days prior to the 
45 execution of documents effecting the transfers described in section 1. 
46 (c) The town of Lancaster shall agree, in a written document to be recorded with the 
47 Worcester registry of deeds, that any portion or portions of the parcels to be retained by the town 
48 of Lancaster pursuant to subsection (a) shall be used solely for municipal purposes. The 
49 document shall include a reversionary clause that stipulates that if the portion or portions of the 
50 parcels to be retained by the town of Lancaster for municipal purposes cease at any time to be 
51 used for municipal purposes, title to the portion or portions which is, or are, no longer used for 
52 municipal purposes shall, at the election of the commonwealth, revert to the commonwealth. 
53 Said reversionary clause shall contain provisions requiring that the town of Lancaster receive 
54 reasonable notice of and a reasonable time to cure any allegation that the parcel is not being used 
55 for the purposes set forth in subsection (a). 
4 of 5 
56 SECTION 5. Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, the town of 
57 Lancaster shall pay for all costs and expenses of the sale of the parcels to the town of Lancaster 
58 pursuant to this act as determined by the commissioner of capital asset management and 
59 maintenance, including, but not limited to, the costs of any recording fees and deed preparation 
60 related to the conveyance and all costs, liabilities and expenses of any nature and kind related to 
61 the town’s ownership of the parcel; provided, however, that such costs shall be included for the 
62 purposes of determining the net proceeds of the town’s sale or lease of any portion of the parcels 
63 described in section 1. The town of Lancaster shall also pay for any appraisal undertaken 
64 pursuant to section 4, the cost of which shall not be included for purposes of determining net 
65 proceeds. 
66 SECTION 6. (a) If the town of Lancaster does not complete the purchase of all of the 
67 parcels described in section 1 on or before June 30, 2025, then notwithstanding sections 33 to 37, 
68 inclusive, of chapter 7C of the General Laws or any other general or special law to the contrary, 
69 the commissioner of capital asset management and maintenance may sell, lease for terms of up to 
70 99 years, including all renewals and extensions, or otherwise grant, convey or transfer to 
71 purchasers or lessees an interest in the parcels that have not been sold to the town pursuant to 
72 section 1 or portions thereof, subject to subsection (b) and on such terms and conditions that the 
73 commissioner considers appropriate. 
74 (b) The commissioner of capital asset management and maintenance shall dispose of the 
75 parcels or portions thereof pursuant to subsection (a) using appropriate competitive bidding 
76 processes and procedures. Not less than 30 days before the date on which bids, proposals or other 
77 offers to purchase or lease the parcels or portions thereof are due, the commissioner shall place a 
78 notice in the central register published by the state secretary pursuant to section 20A of chapter 9 
5 of 5 
79 of the General Laws stating the availability of the parcels or portions thereof, the nature of the 
80 competitive bidding process and other information that the commissioner considers relevant, 
81 including, but not limited to, the time, place and manner for the submission of bids and proposals 
82 and the opening of the bids or proposals. 
83 (c) Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, the grantee or lessee of the 
84 parcels described in section 1 or any portions thereof pursuant to subsection (a), shall be 
85 responsible for costs and expenses of such sale or lease of the parcels or portions thereof to such 
86 grantee or lessee, including, but not limited to, costs associated with deed preparation and 
87 recording fees related to the conveyances and transfers authorized in this section as such costs 
88 may be determined by the commissioner of capital asset management and maintenance.
