1 of 4 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . No. 4711 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
________________________________________ 
 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, September 5, 2024. 
 The committee on Children, Families and Persons with Disabilities, to 
whom were referred the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 126) of 
Brian M. Ashe relative to the rights of deaf children; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 129) of Donald R. Berthiaume, Jr., 
relative to prohibiting undocumented persons from fostering children; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 131) of Donald R. Berthiaume, 
Jr., relative to providing that certain foster care children have the right to 
be emancipated from their biological parents; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 132) of Donald R. Berthiaume, Jr., relative to 
background checks for kinship foster care; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 133) of Donald R. Berthiaume, Jr., relative to the 
Department of Children and Families providing official documentation of 
child counsel appointments; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
136) of Daniel Cahill that the Office on Disability conduct a study of the 
accessibility to gas pumps and gas stations; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 137) of Gerard J. Cassidy, Sally P. Kerans and Michelle 
M. DuBois for legislation to provide insurance coverage for vision 
screening for children; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 138) 
of Gerard J. Cassidy for legislation to further protect persons with 
intellectual or developmental disabilities from abuse; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 139) of Tackey Chan relative to funeral 
assistance; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 140) of Mark J. 
Cusack for legislation to support the transition to adult services for 
persons with disabilities; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
142) of Josh S. Cutler and others relative to community living for older 
adults and people with disabilities; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 143) of Michael S. Day for legislation to promote employment 
for people with disabilities; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 
154) of Michelle M. DuBois relative to child homelessness; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 163) of Michael J. Finn and Lindsay N. 
Sabadosa relative to establishing a pilot diversion program for individuals 
2 of 4 
with developmental and intellectual disabilities; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 167) of Paul K. Frost relative to providing low interest 
loans to families with children suffering from terminal illnesses; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 168) of Paul K. Frost for 
legislation to establish a special task force (including members of the 
General Court) to review and report on the economic impact of welfare 
reform in the Commonwealth; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 170) of William C. Galvin and Carol A. Doherty relative to licensure 
for the use of graduated electronic decelerators to alter behavior of persons 
with disabilities; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 171) of 
Sean Garballey, Simon Cataldo and others relative to Department of 
Developmental Services rates of payment for workers providing support 
and services for individuals with disabilities; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 176) of Colleen M. Garry that the Department of 
Developmental Services consider neuropsychological evaluations of 
certain persons with intellectual disabilities; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 177) of Colleen M. Garry relative to the estimated rate of 
inflation for social service programs; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 180) of Danielle W. Gregoire and others for legislation to 
prohibit the use of procedures which cause physical pain or deny a 
reasonable humane existence to persons with disabilities; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 181) of Patricia A. Haddad and others 
relative to access to early intervention services for children with prenatal 
exposure to opioids; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 182) of 
Natalie M. Higgins, Joan Meschino and Colleen M. Garry that the 
Department of Children and Families be authorized to develop a bias-free 
case review team to screen proposed emergency child removals; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 183) of Steven S. Howitt and F. 
Jay Barrows relative to at-risk children and their proper placement and 
establishing a special commission (including members of the General 
Court) to make an investigation of such placements; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 196) of David Henry Argosky LeBoeuf, 
Vanna Howard and Colleen M. Garry relative to public accommodations 
for individuals with verbal communication impairments; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 199) of Jack Patrick Lewis, Natalie M. 
Higgins and James K. Hawkins that certain retail department stores be 
prohibited from dividing the display of certain childcare items into 
sections by gender; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 200) of 
Marc T. Lombardo relative to eligibility for certain entitlement programs; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 202) of Joseph D. McKenna 
3 of 4 
and David K. Muradian, Jr., relative to expanding wheelchair protection 
for consumers with disabilities; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 215) of Jon Santiago and others that the Department of 
Developmental Services establish caseload ratios for certain human 
service coordinators; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 217) 
of Paul A. Schmid, III relative to income calculation for certain benefits 
paid for necessary work-related travel expenses for certain persons with 
developmental or intellectual disabilities; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 218) of Alan Silvia and others relative to autism 
education reform and to facilitate appropriate interactions with persons on 
the autism spectrum; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 219) of 
Priscila S. Sousa relative to increasing collaboration amongst community 
organizations fighting hunger; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 220) of Alyson M. Sullivan-Almeida and others for legislation to 
establish a special commission to study and determine best practices to 
ensure the safety of blind persons; the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 224) of Bud L. Williams for legislation to establish within the 
Executive Office of Health and Human Services, a state-wide office of 
youth development; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 225) of 
Steven George Xiarhos relative to Department of Transitional Assistance 
benefits for diapers; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 3870) 
of Christine P. Barber and Samantha Montaño for legislation to establish a 
protection and advocacy system for investigating abuse, neglect, and 
financial exploitation of persons with disabilities occurring and advocating 
for the civil and human rights of such persons; and the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 3942) of Estela A. Reyes relative to 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program countable income, reports 
recommending that the accompanying order (House, No. 4711) ought to 
be adopted. 
 
For the committee, 
 
JAY D. LIVINGSTONE. 
 
 
 
4 of 4 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4711 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
 
 
 
 
House of Representatives, September 05, 2024. 
 
1 Ordered, That the committee on Children, Families and Persons with Disabilities be 
2 authorized to sit during a recess of the General Court to make an investigation and study of 
3 House documents numbered 126, 129, 131, 132, 133, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 142, 143, 154, 
4 163, 167, 168, 170, 171, 176, 177, 180, 181, 182, 183, 196, 199, 200, 202, 215, 217, 218, 219, 
5 220, 224, 225, 3870 and 3942, concerning children, accommodations, accessibility and other 
6 related matters. 
7 Said committee shall report to the General Court the results of its investigation and study 
8 and its recommendations, if any, together with drafts of legislation necessary to carry such 
9 recommendations into effect, by filing the same with the Clerk of the House of Representatives 
10 on or before December 31, 2024.
