1 of 3 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . No. 4735 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
________________________________________ 
 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, July 15, 2024. 
 The committee on Environment and Natural Resources, to whom were 
referred the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 744) of Bruce J. 
Ayers relative to the funding of waterway projects and coastal protection 
initiatives; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 745) of Bruce J. 
Ayers relative to community preservation funds for seawall repairs; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 747) of Bruce J. Ayers relative 
to the sale of dogs, cats and rabbits in pet shops; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 774) of Josh S. Cutler and Patrick Joseph Kearney for 
legislation to establish a special commission (including members of the 
General Court) to investigate the possibility of creating a state grant or low 
interest loan program for properties prone to flooding; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 806) of Elliot Elkin relative to 
establishing a special commission on sustainable aviation fuel-induced 
contrail mitigation; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 832) of 
Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to subsurface systems for the 
disposal of domestic sewage; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, 
No. 834) of Bradley H. Jones, Jr., and others relative to ocean 
acidification; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 841) of 
Patrick Joseph Kearney relative to a marine special activity license 
program; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 842) of Patrick 
Joseph Kearney for legislation to establish a flood mitigation and 
preparedness program; the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 848) 
of Kathleen R. LaNatra, Christopher Hendricks and Patrick Joseph 
Kearney relative to establishing a commercial fisheries offshore wind 
mitigation fund to be administered by the Division of Marine Fisheries; 
the petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 856) of Adrian C. Madaro 
that the Secretary of Energy and Environmental Affairs establish a special 
board to identify and assess the cumulative social, economic and public 
health impacts of permissible land uses and water uses within designated 
port areas in environmental justice communities; the petition 
(accompanied by bill, House, No. 858) of Christopher M. Markey and 
2 of 3 
others for an investigation and study by a special commission (including 
members of the General Court) relative to deer population control; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 867) of Mathew J. Muratore 
and others for an investigation by a special commission (including 
members of the General Court) to study the feasibility of creating and 
implementing a gypsy moth spraying program; the petition (accompanied 
by bill, House, No. 883) of David Allen Robertson relative to industrial 
wastewater discharges of dental facilities; the petition (accompanied by 
bill, House, No. 885) of David Allen Robertson relative to maximum 
containment levels for certain harmful compounds in drinking water; the 
petition (accompanied by bill, House, No. 901) of Paul A. Schmid, III and 
Michelle M. DuBois for legislation to exempt veterans from Division of 
State Parks and Recreation fees; and the petition (accompanied by bill, 
House, No. 918) of David T. Vieira relative to changing the name of the 
Inland Fisheries and Game Fund to the George L. Darey inland fisheries 
and game fund, reports recommending that the accompanying order 
(House, No. 4735) ought to be adopted. [Senator Tarr dissents.] 
 
For the committee, 
 
DANIEL CAHILL. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 of 3 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4735 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
 
 
 
 
House of Representatives, 
 
1 Ordered, That the committee on Environment and Natural Resources be authorized to sit 
2 during a recess of the General Court to make an investigation and study of House documents 
3 numbered 744, 745, 747, 774, 806, 832, 834, 841, 842, 848, 856, 858, 867, 883, 885, 901 and 
4 918, relative to waterways, wastewater, floods and other related matters. 
5 Said committee shall report to the General Court the results of its investigation and study 
6 and its recommendations, if any, together with drafts of legislation necessary to carry such 
7 recommendations into effect, by filing the same with the Clerk of the House of Representatives 
8 on or before December 31, 2024.
