HOUSE . . . . . . . No. 4746 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
______________________________________ 
 
 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, June 12, 2024. 
 
The committee on Ways and Means, to whom was referred the Bill 
relative to disability pensions for violent crimes (House, No. 4626), 
reports recommending that the same ought to pass with an amendment 
substituting therefor the accompanying bill (House, No. 4746). 
 
For the committee, 
 
 AARON MICHLEWITZ. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 6 
FILED ON: 6/12/2024 
HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4746 
 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________ 
In the One Hundred and Ninety-Third General Court 
(2023-2024) 
_______________ 
 
An Act relative to disability pensions and critical incident stress management for violent crimes. 
 
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by the authority 
of the same, as follows: 
 
1 SECTION 1. Section 1 of chapter 32 of the General Laws, as appearing in the 2022 
2 Official Edition, is hereby amended by inserting after the definition of “Veteran” the following 
3 definition:- 
4 “Violent act injury”, a catastrophic, life-threatening or life-altering and permanent bodily 
5 injury sustained as a direct and proximate result of a violent attack upon a person by means of a 
6 dangerous weapon, which is designed for the purpose of causing serious injury or death, 
7 including, but not limited to, a firearm, knife, automobile or explosive device. 
8 SECTION 2. Section 7 of said chapter 32, as so appearing, is hereby amended by striking 
9 out subsection (1) and inserting in place thereof the following subsection:- 
10 (1) Conditions for Allowance. – Any member in service classified in Group 1, Group 2 or 
11 Group 4, or any member in service classified in Group 3 to whom the provisions of subdivision 
12 (2) of section 26 are not applicable, who is unable to perform the essential duties of the 
13 member’s job and that such inability is likely to be permanent before attaining the maximum age 
2 of 6 
14 for the member’s group by reason of a personal injury or violent act injury sustained or a hazard 
15 undergone as a result of, and while in the performance of the member’s duties at some definite 
16 place and at some definite time on or after the date of becoming a member or prior to such date 
17 while any provision of this chapter relating to noncontributory pensions was applicable to the 
18 member, without serious and willful misconduct on the member’s part, upon the member’s 
19 written application on a prescribed form filed with the board and the member’s respective 
20 employer or upon such an application by the head of the member’s department after a hearing, if 
21 requested, as provided for in subdivision (1) of section 16 and subject to the conditions set forth 
22 in said section 16 and in this section, shall be deemed retired for an accidental disability as of a 
23 date which shall be specified in such application and which shall be not less than 15 days nor 
24 more than 4 months after the filing of such application but in no event later than the maximum 
25 age for the member’s group. Except as provided for in subdivision (3), no such retirement shall 
26 be allowed unless such injury or violent act injury was sustained or such hazard was undergone 
27 within 2 years prior to the filing of such application or, if occurring earlier, unless written notice 
28 thereof was filed with the board by such member or on the member’s behalf within 90 days after 
29 its occurrence. No retirement under this subsection shall be allowed unless the board, after a 
30 review of the evidence it deems appropriate, and after a review by the commission, pursuant to 
31 the provisions of section 21, and including in any event on examination by the regional medical 
32 panel provided for in subdivision (3) and including a certification of such incapacity by a 
33 majority of the physicians on such medical panel, shall find that such member is unable to 
34 perform the essential duties of the member’s job and that such inability is likely to be permanent, 
35 and that the member should be so retired; provided, however, that no retirement due to a violent 
36 act injury shall be allowed unless the board, after a review of the evidence it deems appropriate, 
3 of 6 
37 and after a review by the commission, pursuant to section 21, and including in any event on 
38 examination or re-examination by the regional medical panel provided for in subdivision (3) and 
39 including a certification of such incapacity by a majority of the physicians on such medical 
40 panel, shall find that such member is physically unable to perform the essential duties of the 
41 member’s job because of a violent act injury and that such inability is likely to be permanent, and 
42 that the member should be so retired. Any member who was injured while a member of a 
43 retirement system established in any governmental unit other than that by which the member is 
44 presently employed, and who has complied with the provisions of this section as to notice, or 
45 whose case falls under subdivision (3), shall file such application with the retirement board of the 
46 unit where the member is presently employed. Such board shall secure a statement of facts and 
47 records, which it shall be the duty of the retirement board of the first governmental unit to 
48 furnish, and on which it shall be entitled to make recommendations. 
49 Prior to the determination of a retirement under this section, a member shall submit to the 
50 retirement board a written statement authorizing release of information from the federal internal 
51 revenue service and the department of revenue relative to the annual gross earned income of the 
52 member in pursuant to an agreement between the federal internal revenue service, the department 
53 of revenue, and the public employee retirement administration commission in accordance with 
54 section 91A. 
55 SECTION 3. Paragraph (a) of subdivision (2) of said section 7 of said chapter 32, as so 
56 appearing, is hereby amended by adding the following clause:- 
57 (iv)(A) Notwithstanding clauses (i) to (iii), inclusive, a yearly amount of pension for any 
58 firefighter, any call, volunteer, auxiliary, intermittent or reserve firefighter, any call, volunteer, 
4 of 6 
59 auxiliary, intermittent or reserve emergency medical services provider who is a member of a 
60 police or fire department and who is not subject to chapter 152, any police officer, any auxiliary, 
61 intermittent, special, part-time or reserve police officer, any municipal or public emergency 
62 medical technician or licensed health care professional who is unable to perform the essential 
63 duties of the member’s job by reason of a violent act injury, paid monthly, shall be equal to 100 
64 per cent of their regular compensation, including all applicable benefits and stipends, that the 
65 member was earning on the date of such violent act injury, as defined in section 1. The annual 
66 amount of pension payable to such member shall be equal to the regular rate of compensation, 
67 which the member would have been paid had the member continued in service at the grade held 
68 by the member at the time of their retirement until their death or reaching mandatory retirement 
69 age, whichever comes first; provided that, if the member reaches the mandatory retirement age, 
70 the member shall be entitled thereafter to 80 per cent of the average annual rate of compensation 
71 paid to the member in the previous 12 months, including any cost of living increases, as defined 
72 in sections 102 and 103. Upon retirement, the member shall receive a lump sum payment from 
73 the applicable retirement board equal to the member’s total accumulated retirement deductions. 
74 In the event that the member predeceases their spouse, the member’s spouse shall be entitled to 
75 75 per cent of the member’s annual pension, paid monthly, as long as such spouse shall live; 
76 provided that, when the member would have reached the mandatory retirement age, the 
77 member’s spouse shall continue to be entitled to 75 per cent of the member’s annual pension, 
78 including any cost of living increases, as defined in sections 102 and 103, that the member would 
79 have received upon reaching the mandatory retirement age; and provided further, that if a 
80 beneficiary is eligible for benefits under this section and under option (c) of section 12, the 
81 beneficiary shall elect to receive either a benefit under option (c) or a benefit pursuant to this 
5 of 6 
82 section but shall not be eligible for both benefits. In the event that the member and the member’s 
83 spouse predecease their children, the member’s surviving unmarried children, if any, who are 
84 under age 18 or, if over that age and under age 22, are full-time students at an accredited 
85 educational institution, or who are over age 18 and physically or mentally incapacitated from 
86 earning income on the date of such member’s retirement, shall be entitled to receive a pension of 
87 equal proportion, paid monthly, which shall total 75 per cent of the amount of the pension 
88 payable to the member at the time of their death. When a child no longer meets the qualifications 
89 for receipt of a pension allocation under this section, said child’s pension allocation shall cease 
90 and any remaining qualified children shall continue to receive the same amount each received 
91 before any child’s allocation ceased. The words “full-time student” and “accredited educational 
92 institutions” shall have the same meanings as defined in clause (iii). 
93 (B) Any member eligible to receive a pension under this clause shall be indemnified for 
94 all hospital, medical and other healthcare expenses, not otherwise covered by health insurance, 
95 related to treatment of injuries that have been or may be incurred after the date of the member’s 
96 retirement as a result of the injuries sustained by the member relating to the violent act injury 
97 while in the performance of the member’s duties. 
98 (C) Notwithstanding the hours and earnings limitations of section 91 or 91A or any other 
99 general or special law to the contrary, the annual earnings of a member receiving benefits under 
100 this clause, from employment in the service of the commonwealth, county, city, town, district or 
101 authority, including as a consultant or independent contractor or as a person whose regular duties 
102 require that their time be devoted to the service of the commonwealth, county, city, town, district 
103 or authority during regular business hours, may equal up to ½ the amount of their retirement 
104 allowance without refund penalty. Such member shall not be eligible for employment under 
6 of 6 
105 Groups 3 and 4 of the retirement system while receiving benefits for accidental disability 
106 retirement outlined under this clause. A member who is receiving benefits under this clause may 
107 be employed by a private entity or in the private sector without refund penalty; provided, that 
108 their service is not devoted to the commonwealth, county, city, town, district or an authority. 
109 Nothing in this section shall prohibit a member under this clause, or such member’s eligible 
110 spouse or children, from receiving additional retirement benefits not required by this clause. 
111 SECTION 4. Said section 7 of said chapter 32, as so appearing, is hereby further 
112 amended by adding the following subdivision:- 
113 (7) Critical Incident Stress Management. – Any firefighter, any call, volunteer, auxiliary, 
114 intermittent or reserve firefighter, any call, volunteer, auxiliary, intermittent or reserve 
115 emergency medical services provider who is a member of a police or fire department and who is 
116 not subject to chapter 152, any police officer, any auxiliary, intermittent, special, part-time or 
117 reserve police officer, any municipal or public emergency medical technician following any 
118 incident involving exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury or sexual violence as set 
119 forth in the most recent version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or 
120 any other incident reasonably warranting a critical incident stress management debriefing, as 
121 determined by an emergency service provider certified by the Massachusetts Peer Support 
122 Network or the International Critical Incident Stress Foundation, Inc., shall receive notice of 
123 critical incident stress management debriefing programs, including the location and times for the 
124 program and contact information.
