SENATE……………………..No. 2540 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
_______________ 
In the One Hundred and Ninety-Second General Court 
(2023-2024) 
_______________ 
 
 
REPORT OF THE 
 
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT 
ADMINISTRATION COMMISSION 
 
SUBMITTING AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES 
AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING RETIREMENT 
OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES IN 
MASSACHUSETTS 
(840 CMR 2.00 Retirement Board Travel) 
(840 CMR 4.00 Financial Operations/Standard Method of Accounting) 
(840 CMR 8.00 Applicability of $30,000 Salary Cap) 
(840 CMR 11.00 Service After Age 70) 
(840 CMR 12.00 Service Between Age 65 and 70) 
(840 CMR 15.00 Miscellaneous) and 
(840 CMR 25.00 The Conduct of Field Examinations of Contributory Retirement Systems) 
 
 
 
(pursuant to Section 50 of 
Chapter 7 of the General Laws) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 28, 2023 
 
PERAC
 
 
 
 
PHILIP Y. BROWN, ESQ., Choir JOHN W. PARSONS. ESQ., Executive Director 
Auditor DIANA DIZOGLIO I KATHLEEN M. FALLON I KATE FITZPATRICK I JAMES J. GUIDO I RICHARD MACKINNON, JR. I JENNIFER F. SULLIVAN, ESQ. 
 
December 20, 2023 
 
Michael D. Hurley, Senate Clerk 
Office of the Clerk of the Senate 
Senate 
State House, Room 335 
Boston, MA 02133 
Dear Mr. Hurley: 
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7, Section 50 of the General Laws, I am pleased on 
behalf of the Public Employee Retirement Administration Commission (PERAC), to file 
amendments to the rules and regulations governing retirement of public employees in 
Massachusetts. PERAC is proposing amendments to seven of our regulations, 840 CMR 2.00 
Retirement Board Travel, 840 CMR 4.00 Financial Operations/Standard Method of Accounting, 
840 CMR 8.00 Applicability of $30,000 Salary Cap, 840 CMR 11.00 Service After Age 70, 840 
CMR 12.00 Service Between Age 65 and 70, 840 CMR 15.00 Miscellaneous, and 840 CMR 25.00 
The Conduct of Field Examinations of Contributory Retirement Systems. 
These regulations are necessaryr to ensure that our retirement systems operate m an efficient manner 
and comply with the provisions of the retirement law, Chapter 32. 
Pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c. 7, § 50, the clerks shall refer this matter to the appropriate 
standing committee of the General Court. If the General Court takes no final action relative to the 
regulations within forty-five days of the date said regulations are refenced to the appropriate 
committee, the General Court not having prorogued within said forty-five days, the regulations shall 
be deemed to be approved. Within fifteen days of receipt of any recommendations, the committee 
shall transmit in writing to PERAC its suggestions, if any, for modifications in recommended 
regulations. Within fifteen days of receipt of the committee’s suggestions, PERAC shall resubmit 
the regulations to the committee, together with any modifications made to them. 
If you have any questions or need additional information, please feel free to contact me. 
 
 Sincerely, 
 
 John W. Parsons, Esq. 
 Executive Director 
Enclosure 
JWP/pmc 
senate transmittal 840 cmr 2, 4,8,11, 12,15,25.doc 
 
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS | PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT ADMINISTRATION 
COMMISSION
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.01 General Provisions (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
2.01. General Provisions 
 
(1) 840 CMR 2.00 is the standard rule for travel and travel related expenditures by retirement 
board members and retirement board staff members. PERAC recognizes that retirement board 
members and the retirement board staff must perform their fiduciary duties in an efficient, 
effective, and informed manner. All travel related expenses that are to be paid for by the board 
shall be related to the purpose of the authorized travel and shall be cost-effective. 
 
(2) PERAC recognizes the importance of continuing education; the need for informed decision 
making by retirement board members; and the need for a broader public pension perspective, 
gained through association with other retirement boards and administrators, both within the 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and throughout the nation, whether virtually or in-person. 
 
(3) Except as otherwise provided by PERAC or by supplementary rules of a particular 
retirement board approved by PERAC pursuant to 840 CMR 14.02 all travel by retirement 
board members and board staff shall comply with 840 CMR 2.00. 
 
(4) Retirement boards may adopt supplementary regulations to supplement and expand upon 
the regulations contained in 840 CMR 2.00. Any such board regulations are to be submitted to 
PERAC for review and approval as required by the provisions of G.L. c. 7, § 50 and c. 32, § 21(4). 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.02 Meaning of Terms (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
2.02. Meaning of Terms 
 
Terms common to these regulations and G.L. c. 268A shall have the 
meaning ascribed to them by G.L. c. 268A and rulings issued pursuant to that 
law. The regulations contained in 840 CMR 2.00 are in addition to, and, in 
some respects, more stringent than the provisions of G.L. c. 268A. Unless 
otherwise defined by the provisions of G.L. c. 32 or regulations promulgated 
by PERAC or by G.L. c. 268A and rulings issued pursuant to that law, the 
usual and customary definitions for terms used in these regulations shall 
apply. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.03 Board Authorization of Travel and
 
 
Travel Related Expenditures (Code of Massachusetts Regulations 
(2021 Edition)) 
2.03. Board Authorization of Travel and Travel Related 
Expenditures 
 
The retirement board shall pay for or make reimbursement to Board 
Members and the staff of the retirement board for all travel and lodging 
expenses except as specifically authorized pursuant to 840 CMR 2.13 for 
expenses related to legitimate speaking engagements. 
 
1. Travel and related expenses are to be approved by the board in advance of 
the travel. 
 
2. Requests for travel by board members and the retirement board 
Executive Director/Administrator shall be placed on a board meeting 
agenda, discussed in open session, and approved by a majority vote of the 
members of the board present and voting. The meeting minutes shall reflect 
the board's action, the extent of the authorization, and supporting 
information addressing the nature of the travel and its purpose. 
 
3. A board may authorize the Executive Director/Board Administrator to 
approve travel for other members of the board's staff. The board should 
establish policies and procedures for staff travel. Such policies and 
procedures shall be consistent with 840 CMR 2.00. 
 
 
4. A statement describing the presentation, conference, or seminar should 
be entered into the minutes of the meeting following the travel. 
 
 
5. Boards shall obtain the most cost-effective means of travel and 
travel related expenses, pursuant to these regulations and the board’s 
approved supplementary regulations. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.04 Required Documentation for
 
 
Reimbursement (Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 
Edition)) 
2.04. Required Documentation for Reimbursement 
 
1. The board shall develop a form to be used in connection with any requests 
for reimbursement, requiring that the traveler certify that the expenses were 
incurred and were necessary and incidental to the approved travel. 
 
2. All requests for reimbursement shall be completed and properly approved 
after incurring any travel, transportation or meal or other travel related 
expenses and before reimbursement takes place. The retirement boards 
shall require that requests for reimbursement be submitted within a 
reasonable time after the expenses are incurred, but in no event longer than 
60 days after the expenses were incurred. If expenses for a single event were 
incurred over a number of days, requests for reimbursement shall be 
submitted no later than 60 days from the last day that expenses were 
incurred. 
 
3. Itemized receipts must be submitted for all expenses including 
transportation, lodging, and other expenses incidental to travel. 
 
4. Travel-related expenses that are under $10 (such as gratuities) should be 
fully described and reimbursed based on the traveler's certification that the 
expenses were necessary and incidental to the approved travel. 
 
5. The board should use due diligence in reviewing and approving 
reimbursement requests. Any travel related expenditures which have not 
been properly documented or approved or are not in conformity with 840 
CMR 2.00 must be rejected or adjusted. 
 
6. Reimbursement shall only be made to the person who actually made 
payment for the expense. 
 
7. The reimbursement request form must be signed by the person seeking 
reimbursement and signed under the penalties of perjury. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.05 Travel Arrangements (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
2.05. Travel Arrangements 
 
1. The board should designate a board staff member to be responsible for 
making all travel arrangements and for assisting board members and board 
staff in completing reimbursement forms. If a board member or board staff 
member elects to make his or her own travel arrangements, the provisions 
of 840 CMR 2.00 shall apply. 
 
2. When making travel arrangements, government rates, business rates, or 
the most cost-effective rate shall be secured. The board must be satisfied 
that the rate is fair and reasonable before reimbursement is approved. 
 
3. The board may authorize an extended stay if the net cost to the board will 
be lower. For example, if airline fare is lowered by staying an extra day and 
the cost of accommodations and meals for that extra day results in a net 
savings to the board, an extended stay can be authorized. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.06 Transportation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
2.06. Transportation 
 
1. Cost effective means of transportation shall be utilized. 
 
2. All travel should be at the lowest fare available, generally economy/coach. 
The board may, by supplementary regulation, submitted and approved by 
PERAC, establish routing criteria, for example, requiring no more than one 
interim stop each way; not requiring more than one scheduled airplane 
transfer each way; or allowing for reasonable departure and arrival times. 
 
3. A retirement board shall not make payment or reimbursement for airline 
club memberships. 
 
4. If a retirement board authorizes the use of rental cars, the board may, by 
supplementary regulation, submitted to and approved by PERAC, establish 
that the source of such cars shall be a national rental agency, and that the 
rental cars shall be "standard class". It is the traveler's responsibility to 
verify that the rate charged is the rate negotiated. 
 
5. The retirement board shall determine whether optional insurance 
coverage for travel will be required. 
 
6. Any motor vehicle accidents, which occur while using a rental car while on 
board-approved travel, are to be reported as soon as practicable, in writing 
to the appropriate authorities, with copies of all such reports provided to the 
board. 
 
7. No reimbursements shall be made for fines or other expenses incurred as 
a result of traffic violations while on board-approved travel. The traveler is 
personally responsible for such expenses. 
 
8. The retirement board shall, by supplementary regulation, submitted and 
approved by PERAC, establish the allowable rate of reimbursement for use 
of personal motor vehicle. The per mile rate of reimbursement shall not 
exceed the amount allowed by the Internal Revenue Service. If the board 
does not submit a supplementary regulation, then the Internal Revenue 
Service rate shall be used. Parking fees and toll charges may be reimbursed, 
subject to proper documentation. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.07 Lodging (Code of Massachusetts 
Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
2.07. Lodging 
 
1. All reservations for accommodations should be made in advance. It is the 
traveler's responsibility to verify that the rate charged is the rate negotiated. 
Reimbursement for accommodations shall not exceed the amount charged 
for "standard" accommodations. If accommodations are included as a part 
of a registration fee, the board must be satisfied that the rate for such 
accommodations is fair and reasonable before reimbursement or payment is 
approved. 
 
2. Reimbursement is prohibited if lodging is included in the cost of registration for a 
conference or seminar.
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.08 Meals (Code of Massachusetts 
Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
2.08. Meals 
 
1. retirement boards must, by supplementary regulation, submitted and 
approved by PERAC, establish and identify the maximum daily 
reimbursable amount for the cost of meals while on board authorized travel. 
The board may, by supplementary regulation, submitted and approved by 
PERAC, allow for reimbursement in excess of the allowable amount for 
travel to high-cost locations. 
 
2. Reimbursement is prohibited if meals are included in the cost of 
registration for a conference or seminar. If the board determines that special 
circumstances require a board member or board staff member to take meals 
other than those included in the cost of registration, reimbursement may be 
made provided that all provisions of 840 CMR 2.00 are met. The special 
circumstances must be discussed in a board meeting and the board's 
determination must be reflected in the minutes of the board. 
 
3. If reimbursement is sought for meal expenses for others, those individuals 
are to be identified along with their affiliation and a description of the 
purpose of the meeting. Reimbursement shall be made only for meetings 
that are for business purposes. 
 
4. Retirement boards shall never reimburse for the cost of alcoholic beverages.
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.09 Other Reimbursable and Non-
 
 
Reimbursable Expenses (Code of Massachusetts Regulations 
(2021 Edition)) 
2.09. Other Reimbursable and Non-Reimbursable Expenses 
 
1. Retirement boards may reimburse board members or board staff 
members for the following items: 
 
a) gratuities paid in accordance with local custom; 
 
b) telephone expenses limited to board or business related calls; 
 
c) internet connection charges; 
 
d) costs for faxing related to Board business; 
 
e) costs for necessary copying related to board business; or 
 
f) mandatory resort or hotel fees. 
 
2. Retirement boards shall not reimburse board members or board staff members for the 
following items: 
a) personal expenses, for example, in-room movies, mini-bar 
charges, gym fees, entertainment or recreational expenses, 
laundry and dry cleaning, spa visits, or payments for alcoholic 
beverages. 
 
b) This list of prohibited reimbursements is not exhaustive.
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.10 Cash Advances (Code of Massachusetts
Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
 
2.10. Cash Advances 
 
Retirement boards shall not make cash advances to board members or 
Board staff members. 
 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.11 Board Credit Cards (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
2.11. Reserved 
 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.12 Personal Travel Combined with Board
 
 
Related Travel (Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 
 Edition)) 
2.12. Personal Travel Combined with Board Related Travel 
 
If personal travel is combined with board related travel, the personal portion 
of the travel and related expenses will be clearly identified and paid for by 
the traveler. Travel expenses or any other expenses incurred by a spouse, 
relative, friend, or other individual accompanying a board member or board 
staff member will be considered to be personal travel and will, in no event, 
be a proper expense of the retirement board. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.13 Payments or Reimbursements for 
Expenses by Third Parties (Code of Massachusetts Regulations 
(2021 Edition))
 
 
2.13. Payments or Reimbursements for Expenses by Third 
Parties 
 
1. Providing to or receipt by a board member or staff member of anything of 
substantial value from any person, firm, partnership, or other entity, either 
directly or indirectly, as outlined and discussed in G.L. c. 268A, is strictly 
prohibited. 
 
2. In instances where a retirement board member or board staff member 
participates in a legitimate speaking engagement, the board shall pay all 
costs and expenses related to such speaking engagement, provided, that the 
board member or board staff member complies with all of the board's travel 
regulations. The board may accept reimbursement for such travel related 
expenses of a board member or a member of the board's staff from the third 
party, only under the following limited circumstances: 
 
a) A board member or a board staff member may participate in 
legitimate speaking engagements in connection with their positions 
on the retirement board or as a member of the board's staff and the 
board may accept reimbursements from third parties necessary to 
cover travel related costs for such engagements. 
 
b) Acceptance of an honorarium or any other form of 
compensation is strictly prohibited. 
 
c) To be considered a legitimate speaking engagement, the 
presentation must be formally scheduled on the agenda of a 
convention or conference. 
 
d) The speaking engagement must be scheduled in advance 
of the board member's or board staff member's arrival at the 
event. 
 
e) The presentation must be before an organization that 
would normally have outside speakers address them at such an 
event. 
 
f) The presentation cannot be perfunctory, but should 
significantly contribute to the event, taking into account such 
factors as the length of the speech or presentation, the size of the 
audience, and the extent to which the speaker is providing 
substantive or unique information or viewpoints. 
 
g) The retirement board can be reimbursed by a third party 
for expenses only to the extent necessary for making the speech 
or presentation. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 2.13 Payments or Reimbursements for 
Expenses by Third Parties (Code of Massachusetts Regulations 
(2021 Edition))
 
 
h) Under no circumstances can a board member or board staff 
member receive reimbursement or any other payment or 
compensation from a third party. 
 
3. In instances where a retirement board member or board staff member 
participates in a non-profit professional organization related to public 
pension or public retirement, the retirement board may be reimbursed by 
the organization for the expenses related to such participation. The travel or 
participation must be approved by the board in advance of any 
expenditures, and the minutes of the board must note this action. No 
organization, association, or group of any sort that is comprised of or 
supported by any person, firm, partnership, or other entity, either directly 
or indirectly, as outlined and discussed in G.L. c. 268A, shall reimburse a 
retirement board for any expenses of a board member or board staff 
member to participate in any activities of that organization. 
 
 
Board Travel Supplementary Regulations (Code of Massachusetts 
Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
2.14. Violation of These Regulations or Board Travel 
Supplementary Regulations 
 
Any person or entity that violates 840 CMR 2.00 or any retirement board 
supplementary regulation approved by PERAC prior to the effective date of 
840 CMR 2.00 shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of 840 CMR 
17.00 and shall be subject to removal as an investment manager or 
consultant. 
 
 
 
840 CMR 4.00 Financial Operations/Standard Method of 
Accounting (Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
840 CMR 4.00. Financial Operations/Standard Method of 
Accounting 
 
840 CMR 4.00, establishing standard methods of accounting for boards, is 
promulgated by PERAC pursuant to M.G.L. c. 7, § 50 and M.G.L. c. 32, § 
21. Except as may otherwise be provided by the PERAC, or by 
supplementary rules of a particular retirement board approved by the 
PERAC pursuant to 840 CMR 14.02, or by statute, 840 CMR 4.00 shall 
govern methods of accounting of all retirement boards. 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
 
840 CMR 4.00: M.G.L. c. 7, §50; c. 32, §§ 21. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 4.01 
 
 
Definitions (Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
4.01. Definitions 
 
 
Accounting Period – January 1st through December 31st. 
 
Adjusting Journal – contains all entries that do not involve cash. 
 
Cash Books – includes the following reports: cash receipts, cash 
disbursements, adjusting journal entries, trial balance and general ledger. 
 
Cash Disbursements Journal – contains entries of all cash disbursements 
from the system. 
 
Cash Receipts Journal – contains entries of all cash receipts into the system. 
 
Extension – when PERAC allows a board, upon a written request, to submit 
the Annual Statement by June 1 rather than May 1. 
 
General Ledger – a means for keeping record of the system’s total financial 
accounts. It includes all accounts, entries and balances for: Assets, 
Liabilities, Funds, Receipts and Disbursements. 
 
Pre-Close Trial Balance/General Ledger – lists all ledger accounts and 
balances before the closing entries are made. 
 
Post-Close Trial Balance/General Ledger – produced after the closing entries 
are made to zero out the receipts and disbursements accounts. 
 
Trial Balance – list of all ledger accounts showing a beginning balance, 
debits, credits, and ending balance. 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 4.02 Entries and Posting of Accounts; Trial
 
 
Balance and General Ledger (Code of Massachusetts Regulations 
(2021 Edition)) 
 
4.02. Entries and Posting of Accounts; Trial Balance and General 
Ledger 
 
Every board shall establish, number, and maintain ledger accounts in the form 
prescribed by PERAC. 
 
(1) Transactions shall be entered daily. 
 
 
(2) A Trial Balance shall be run monthly. 
 
 
(3) A General Ledger shall be run monthly. 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 4.03 Copies to be Sent to PERAC (Code of
 
 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
4.03. Copies to be Sent to PERAC 
 
(1) After all entries for the month have been posted , the board shall send to 
PERAC in the prescribed format the following for the month: 
 
(a) monthly cash receipts ; 
(b) monthly cash disbursements; 
(c) monthly adjusting journal entries; 
(d) monthly general ledger; and 
(e) year-to-date trial balance. 
 
 
The following chart indicates the due dates for the monthly cash books: 
 
Month of Accounting Due Date 
January May 31st 
February May 31st 
March June 30th 
April June 30th 
May July 31st 
June July 31st 
July August 31st 
August September 30th 
September October 31st 
October November 30th 
November December 31st 
December* March 31st 
 
 
*Along with the December cash books, the board should also provide a January-
December post-close trial balance and general ledger. 
 
The State and Teachers systems will not be subject to this timeline as they operate 
on the state fiscal year. 
 
(2) The board shall send or have sent to PERAC a copy of all custodian 
statements received by the board within four weeks of the close of the 
month. Such statements shall be separated into the following five 
categories: cash, short term investments*, fixed income investments, 
equities, and pooled funds. Such statements shall include, but not be limited 
to: 
 
(a) monthly custodian bank statements which detail transaction activity 
including investment income, investments purchased, accrued interest paid, 
investments sold, book value of investments sold, profit/loss on investments 
sold, accrued interest sold, cusip numbers, name of brokers and 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 4.03 Copies to be Sent to PERAC (Code of
 
 
commissions paid, trade receivables and payables, trade dates, settlement 
dates and actual settlement dates. 
 
*Short term investments are defined as U.S. Treasury Bills, Commercial 
Paper, Certificates of Deposit, Repurchase Agreements, Cooperative Shares, 
Savings and Loan Shares, Money Market and Term Deposits. 
 
(b) monthly account appraisal which provides an alphabetical listing of 
assets held for each category; information for each asset should include a 
complete description of the asset, cusip numbers, number of shares, book 
value and market value. 
 
(3) The board shall send or have sent to PERAC a copy of all manager 
statements received by the board within four weeks of the close of the 
month. Such statements shall detail the activity of the retirement system 
including purchases and sales of fund shares, income, dividend re-
investments, fund expenses, and ownership interest of the retirement 
system in any commingled funds, including, but not limited to, separate 
accounts, bank pooled funds, mutual funds, group trusts and limited 
partnerships. 
 
(4) The board shall send or have sent to PERAC a copy of all Consultant 
statements received by the board within four weeks of the close of the month. Such 
statements shall include quarterly and year to date performance figures, listing of 
assets, asset allocations, and individual asset appraisal values. 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 4.03 Copies to be Sent to PERAC (Code of
 
 
(Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
4.04. Failure to File Financial Reports 
 
Any retirement board failing to file the financial statements and reports 
required by M.G.L. c. 32, § 20(5)(g), or by 840 CMR 4.03 shall be subject 
to the penalties provided by M.G.L. c. 32, § 24(2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 4.03 Copies to be Sent to PERAC (Code of
 
 
 
 
4.05 Copies to be Shared with Board Members 
 
Board staff shall share completed monthly cash books with all Board members. 
 
Additionally, Board staff shall share cash reconciliations, as well as a quarterly comparison 
of budgeted amounts to actual spending with all board members. 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 8.01 Definitions (Code of Massachusetts 
Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
 
840 CMR 8.00. Applicability Of $30,000 Salary Cap [Details] 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
 
840 CMR 8.00: M.G.L. c. 7, § 50; c. 32, § 21. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 8.01 Definitions (Code of Massachusetts
 
 
Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
8.01. Definitions 
 
As used in 840 CMR 8.00, unless a different meaning is plainly required by 
the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
 
Capped system, any retirement system other than an uncapped system 
 
Non-section 50 restricted service, any service other than St. 1978, c. 367, §50 
restricted service. 
 
Section 50 restricted service, service by an employee to whom the $30,000 
cap applies in a system that remains a capped system. 
 
$30,000 cap, The maximum salary upon which a retirement allowance may 
be based pursuant to St. 1978, c. 367, § 50. 
 
Uncapped system, the state employees' and the state teachers' retirement 
systems and any other system that: 
 
(a) 
 
(a) accepts the provisions of M.G.L. c. 32, § 22(1)(b½), or 
 
(b) accepts an annual pension funding grant pursuant to M.G.L. c. 32, § 
22D. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 8.02 Applicability of the &dollar;30,000
 
 
Cap (Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
8.02. Applicability of the $30,000 Cap 
 
(1) St. 1987, c. 697, § 64 makes the $30,000 cap inapplicable to members of 
the state employees' and teachers' retirement systems and members of any 
system that: 
 
(a) accepts the provisions of M.G.L. c. 32, § 22(1)(b½), or 
 
(b) accepts an annual pension funding grant pursuant to M.G.L. c. 32, § 22D 
The $30,000 cap is, in effect, repealed for members of these uncapped 
systems. 
 
(2) The state employees' and teachers' retirement systems became uncapped 
as of January 1, 1988. Other systems become uncapped effective upon filing 
with the Commission a certificate of acceptance pursuant to 840 CMR 
8.02(1)(a) or upon a vote to accept a grant pursuant to 840 CMR 8.02(1)(b), 
whichever occurs first. 
 
(3) The $30,000 cap remains applicable to those members of capped 
systems who became members on or after January 1, 1979. This includes: 
 
(a) Members who were employed prior to January 1, 1979 but became 
members on or after January 1, 1979. Persons who were employed prior to 
January 1, 1979 and were not permitted membership by administrative 
oversight, or through no fault on the part of the member, are not subject to 
the $30,000 cap. 
 
(b) Individuals who were members prior to January 1, 1979 but left 
employment taking a return of accumulated deductions and then returned 
to employment and become members after January 1, 1979, whether or not 
previous service was repurchased. Persons who become members prior to 
January 1, 1979 and thereafter maintained membership, active or inactive, 
are not subject to the $30,000 cap. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 8.03 Additional Two Percent Contribution
 
 
(Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
8.03. Additional Two Percent Contribution 
 
Effective on the date that a system becomes uncapped, for each member of 
the system to whom the $30,000 cap had applied an additional two percent of 
that portion of regular compensation in excess of an annualized rate of 
$30,000 shall be withheld each payday. For such members paid weekly, for 
example, two percent shall be withheld from all regular compensation in 
excess of $576.92 per week. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 8.04 Other Contributions (Code of
 
 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
8.04. Other Contributions 
 
(1) In the case of systems (other than the state employees' and teachers' 
systems) that become uncapped on or before July 1, 1988, for each member 
of the system to whom the $30,000 cap had applied an amount shall be 
withheld from that portion of regular compensation in excess of an 
annualized rate of $30,000, in such installments as the retirement board 
shall direct, equal to the additional amount that would have been withheld 
pursuant to 840 CMR 8.03 between January 1, 1988 and the date the system 
becomes uncapped. 
 
(2) In the case of systems that become uncapped after July 1, 1988 
contributions pursuant to 840 CMR 8.04(1) shall not be required. 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 8.04 Other Contributions (Code of
 
 
(Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
8.05. Effect of Cap on Retirement Allowance 
 
(1) If upon retirement a member to whom the $30,000 cap applied has 
service in a capped system, and no service in an uncapped system, the 
maximum salary upon which the retirement allowance may be based is 
$30,000 whether the member is retired for superannuation or for ordinary or 
accidental disability. 
 
The amount of regular compensation to be used in calculating the 
retirement allowance of such members shall not exceed $30,000. 
 
(2) If upon retirement a member to whom the $30,000 cap applied has 
service in both a capped system and an uncapped system, the retirement 
allowance shall be based upon the number of years of section 50 restricted 
service and the number of years of non-section 50 restricted service. For this 
purpose, all service of a member in a system that remains a capped system 
at the time of retirement shall be included in section 50 restricted service, 
regardless of the member's actual rate of regular compensation, if the 
$30,000 cap was applicable to the member at the time of the service. All 
service of a member in a system that is uncapped at the time of retirement 
shall be included in non-section 50 restricted service. The retirement 
allowance of any such member shall be the sum of the allowance calculated 
based upon the years of section 50 restricted service and the allowance 
calculated based upon the years of non-section 50 restricted service. 
 
(3) If the retirement allowance of a member, or eligible beneficiary of a 
member, is affected by service in a system that remained capped at the time 
of retirement and the system later becomes uncapped, the retirement 
allowance shall be recalculated as of the date the system becomes uncapped. 
Any service in a system that has become uncapped since the time of 
retirement shall be included in non-section 50 restricted service for 
purposes of this recalculation. No member or beneficiary shall be required 
to make any additional contributions as a condition of such recalculation. 
 
840 Cmr 11.00 Service After Age 70 [Details] (Code of
 
 
840 CMR 11.00. Service After Age 70 [Details] 
 
840 CMR 11.00 is the standard rule for service after age 70 promulgated by 
the Public Employee Retirement Administration Commission pursuant to 
M.G.L. c. 7, § 50. Except as otherwise provided by the Commission, by 
supplementary rules of a particular retirement board approved by the 
Commission pursuant to 840 CMR 14.02, or by statute, 840 CMR 11.00 
shall govern the procedures of all retirement boards relating to service after 
age 70. 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
 
840 CMR 11.00: M.G.L. c. 7, § 50; c. 32, § 21. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 11.01 Notice to Members (Code of
 
 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
11.01. Notice to Members 
 
Not more than 180 nor less than 120 days before the last day of the month in 
which a member in service attains the age of 70, the retirement board shall 
estimate the member's option (a), (b) and, if sufficient information is 
available, (c) retirement benefits as of age 70 and shall notify the member of 
the estimate and procedures for continuing in service after age 70. The board 
shall also supply the member with the appropriate form on which to choose 
whether to continue to have deductions made from regular compensation 
until the date of retirement as prescribed by 840 CMR 11.02. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 11.02 Deductions After Age 70; Election
 
 
(Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
11.02. Deductions After Age 70; Election 
 
(1) Any member who chooses to continue in service after age 70 may elect to 
have deductions made from regular compensation until the date of 
retirement. The retirement board shall provide the member with the 
appropriate form on which the member may elect to have deductions made 
after age 70. This form shall be completed and filed by the member with the 
retirement board within 15 working days of the board's notice to the 
member or the member's 70th birthday, whichever is later. If this form is 
not timely filed, no deductions shall be made after age 70. 
 
(2) An election to have deductions made after age 70 shall be final and 
deductions shall not thereafter be discontinued for any active member. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 11.02 Deductions After Age 70; Election
 
 
of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
11.03. Effect on Retirement Benefits 
 
(1) Except as provided by 840 CMR 11.02, no deductions shall be made from the 
regular compensation of a member continuing in service after age 70 and the 
retirement allowance shall be calculated based on average annual rate of regular 
compensation received prior to age 70. 
 
(2) For members who timely so elect pursuant to 840 CMR 11.02, 
deductions shall be made from regular compensation until the date of 
retirement and the retirement allowance shall be calculated based on 
average annual rate of regular compensation including compensation 
received after age 70. 
 
(3) No member shall be required to elect a retirement option pursuant to 
M.G.L. c. 32, § 12 until termination of employment. 
 
(4) If a member dies after age 70 but before termination, the member's spouse 
shall be entitled, if otherwise eligible pursuant to M.G.L. c. 32, to the benefits that 
would have been payable if the member had retired on the date of death and 
elected Option C. 
 
(5) Upon the decision of a member to terminate service, the member may file a 
retirement application with the retirement board and the retirement allowance 
shall be calculated pursuant to 840 CMR 15.04. 
 
840 Cmr 12.00 Service After Age 65 (Code of Massachusetts 
Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
840 CMR 12.00. Service After Age 65 
 
840 CMR 12.00 is the standard rule for service after age 65 promulgated by 
the Public Employee Retirement Administration Commission pursuant to 
M.G.L. c. 7, § 50 and St. 1987, c. 415. 
 
Except as otherwise provided by the Commission, by supplementary rules of a 
particular retirement board approved by the Commission pursuant to 840 CMR 
14.02, or by statute, 840 CMR 12.00 shall govern the procedures of all retirement 
boards relating to service after age 65. 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
 
840 CMR 12.00: M.G.L. c. 7, § 50; c. 32, § 21. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 12.03 Effect on Retirent Benefits (Code
 
 
 
12.01. Notice to Members 
 
 
(1) No member may continue in service after age 65 if the member is in an 
occupation or position classification for which the personnel administrator 
determines by regulation that age is a bona fide occupational qualification or is in 
one of the following occupations or position classifications unless the personnel 
administrator determines by regulation that age is not a reasonably necessary 
bona fide occupational qualification: 
 
(a) uniformed member of a paid fire department; 
 
(b) uniformed member of a police department; 
 
(c) member of the department of fisheries and wildlife, as determined by the 
personnel administrator; 
 
(d) correctional officer; 
 
(e) permanent crash crewman, crash boatman, fire controlman, or assistant fire 
controlman employed at the General Edward Lawrence Logan International 
Airport. 
 
(2) If the board determines that the member is in an occupation or position 
classification which requires that the member retire at age 65, the board shall 
notify the member 120 prior to the date the member is required to retire. 
 
 
 
 
840 Cmr 15.00 Miscellaneous (Code of Massachusetts 
 Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
840 CMR 15.00. Miscellaneous 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
 
840 CMR 15.00: M.G.L. c. 7, § 50; c. 32, and 21. 
 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.01 Attestation of Retired Members and 
Beneficiaries (Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition)) 
 
15.01. Attestation of Retired Members and Beneficiaries 
 
(1) No less frequently than once every two years, each retirement board shall 
require each member or beneficiary who receives a pension, retirement 
allowance, or survivor's allowance to file with the retirement board an 
attestation under the penalties of perjury, at such time and in such form as 
the board shall prescribe, containing the following information: 
 
(a) the name of the member or beneficiary; 
 
(b) the current address of the member or beneficiary; 
 
(c) a statement certifying that the member or beneficiary is currently living; 
 
(d) a statement describing the beneficiary's current marital 
status where marital status is relevant to continued receipt of 
benefits; 
 
(e) a statement describing the beneficiary's current dependency 
status where dependency is relevant to continued receipt of benefits; 
and 
 
(f) such additional information as the board may require 
to determine whether the member or beneficiary is entitled to 
continued receipt of benefits. 
 
(2) If a member or beneficiary comes to the retirement office in person to 
verify the above information, they will be considered to have satisfied the 
requirements of the attestation. 
 
(3) The retirement board shall withhold the retirement benefits of any 
member or beneficiary who fails to file the attestation within the time 
prescribed pending receipt of the attestation. Upon receipt of the 
attestation, any benefits so withheld shall be paid to the retired member or 
beneficiary. 
 
(4) The retirement board may review and verify the accuracy of any 
attestation submitted and shall audit a random sample of at least five per 
cent of the attestations received. 
 
A retirement board shall be deemed to have complied with Sections 1-4 if it performs a 
data match of the demographic information and status of current retirees and beneficiaries 
receiving benefits no less than every six months by a third-party entity contracted through 
an approved selection or procurement process. 
A retirement board shall preserve or ensure that the results of any such data match are 
 
 
 
 accessible through the next PERAC audit.
 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.02 Purchase of Prior Membership 
Creditable Service; Purchase of Creditable Service for Non- 
membership Service; Rates of Contribution Upon Return to 
Active Service (Code of Massachusetts Regulations (2021 
Edition)) 
15.02. Purchase of Prior Membership Creditable Service; 
Purchase of Creditable Service for Non-Membership Service; 
Rates of Contribution Upon Return to Active Service 
 
(1) Purchase of Prior Membership Creditable Service. Any member 
authorized by law to purchase prior creditable service may purchase such 
service by paying an amount equal to the accumulated regular deductions 
withdrawn by the member, together with the appropriate statutorily 
defined interest. Any member may make a lump sum payment or 
installment payments over a period not exceeding five years and may, with 
the approval of the board, make installment payments over a period 
exceeding five years. 
 
(2) Purchase of Non-Membership Creditable Service. Upon submission of 
documentation satisfactory to the retirement board and consistent with 
Chapter 32, a member will be allowed to purchase creditable service for 
periods of non- membership employment. The amount of creditable service 
that may be purchased shall be determined by the retirement board in a 
manner consistent with the retirement board's supplementary regulations 
that have been approved by PERAC pursuant to 840 CMR 14.00. The 
member may purchase less than all non-membership service available for 
purchase; provided, however, that in such event the member must purchase 
the most recent time first. 
 
(3) If more than one type of purchase is available, the member can choose 
which type of service they wish to purchase. Additionally, if the member 
can complete both a purchase of non-membership and membership 
service, the member has the option to choose which to complete first. 
 
(4) Rates of Contribution Upon Return to Active Service. The rates of 
contribution for members formerly in service who have returned to the 
service of the same or another governmental unit shall be as follows: 
 
(a) for any member who contributed to a retirement system and 
did not receive a refund of accumulated deductions when he or she 
left service, the contribution rate upon the member's return to 
service shall be the same rate as the member was contributing at the 
time he or she left service; 
 
(b) the contribution rate for any member who contributed to a 
retirement system, and received a refund of accumulated 
deductions after termination of service, shall be the contribution 
rate in effect when the member re- established membership, 
whether or not the member purchases prior creditable service. 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.03 Regular Compensation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
15.03. Regular Compensation 
 
(1) During any period of active service prior to July 1, 2009 the term "regular 
compensation" as defined by M.G.L. c. 32, § 1, shall be determined subject to 
the following: 
 
(a) To be considered regular compensation, any compensation to an 
employee must: 
 
1. have been actually paid to or on behalf of a member: 
 
2. be made as remuneration for services actually rendered, for recurring 
payments for accrued sick leave, or for payments made pursuant to M.G.L. c. 
41, § 111F in the year or part of a year to which the compensation is 
attributed; 
 
3. be ordinary, normal, recurrent, repeated, and of indefinite duration; 
 
4. be made pursuant to an official written policy of the employer or to a 
collective bargaining agreement; 
 
5. be made on a non-discriminatory basis and be generally available for 
employees who are similarly situated relative to the purpose of the payment 
(e.g. a longevity payment made recurrently to all employees in a bargaining 
unit having attained a specific length of service) provided that the ability of a 
payment to be denied due to merit shall not exclude it for that reason from 
regular compensation. 
 
(b) Regular compensation shall include any part of such salary, wages, or 
other compensation derived from federal grants, except as otherwise 
provided in M.G.L. c. 32, § 3(2)(a)(xi); 
 
(c) Lump-sum or retroactive payments which would have been regular 
compensation if paid in the periods in which the services remunerated 
thereby were actually rendered will be allocated to said periods rather than 
being entirely attributed to the time of receipt for the purpose of 
determining a member's regular compensation. 
 
(d) Provided they meet the general criteria in 840 CMR 15.03(1)(a) through 
(c), payments to be considered regular compensation shall include: 
 
1. a member's annual rate of compensation as provided in an approved 
salary schedule; 
 
2. any non-cash maintenance allowances in the form of full or partial 
boarding and housing, as provided in M.G.L. c. 32, § 22(1)(c); 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.03 Regular Compensation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
3. any premiums paid by any governmental unit for the purchase of an 
individual or group annuity contract as authorized by M.G.L. c. 15, § 18A or 
by M.G.L. c. 71, § 37B; 
 
4. any amounts paid as educational incentives; 
 
5. any amounts paid for length of service; 
 
6. any amounts paid as premiums for shift differentials; and 
 
7. any amounts paid as cost-of-living bonuses or cost-of-living pay 
adjustments. 
 
(2) During any period of active service prior to July 1, 2009, any 
extraordinary or ad hoc payment amount shall be excluded from regular 
compensation. Exclusions shall include, but not be limited to: 
 
(a) any amounts paid for hours worked beyond the member's normal work 
schedule; 
 
(b) any amounts paid as premiums for working holidays, except as 
authorized by law; 
 
(c) any amounts paid as bonuses other than cost-of-living bonuses, provided 
that any payment to an employee or group of employees which will not recur 
or which will recur for only a limited or definite term will be considered a 
bonus, and further provided that any payments to an employee or group of 
employees as part of a salary augmentation plan or salary enhancement 
program which is provided for in an individual contract in effect on or 
before January 25, 2006 or in a collective bargaining agreement in effect on 
or before January 25, 2006, including payments under such a plan or 
program which will not recur or which will recur for only a limited or 
definite term, shall be treated as regular compensation; and further 
provided, that any employee who is covered by such an agreement or 
contract on January 25, 2006 and who begins, at any time during the life of 
a collective bargaining agreement or individual employment contract in 
effect on or before January 25, 2006, to receive benefits and make 
retirement contributions pursuant to a salary augmentation plan or salary 
enhancement program under such a collective bargaining agreement or 
individual employment contract, may complete the plan or program under 
that agreement or contract or under a successor collective bargaining 
agreement or individual employment contract, provided that the successor 
collective bargaining agreement or individual employment contract contains 
a salary augmentation plan or salary enhancement program; and further 
provided that the amount of the salary augmentation plan or salary 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.03 Regular Compensation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
enhancement program under a successor collective bargaining agreement or 
individual employment contract which shall be treated as regular 
compensation shall not exceed the amount of the salary augmentation plan or 
salary enhancement program provided under the collective bargaining 
agreement or individual employment contract in effect on or before January 
25, 2006, and further provided that any member who has previously retired 
and is receiving benefits as of April 7, 2006 under the provisions of a salary 
augmentation plan or salary enhancement program shall have that plan 
deemed in compliance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 32. 
 
(d) any amounts paid in lieu of or for unused vacation, sick leave, or other 
leave; 
 
(e) severance pay; 
 
(f) any amounts paid as early retirement incentives; and 
 
(g) any other payments made as a result of the member giving notice of 
retirement. 
 
(3) During any period of active service subsequent to July 1, 2009 the term 
"regular compensation", as defined by M.G.L. c. 32, § 1, shall be determined 
subject to the following: 
 
(a) to be considered regular compensation, any compensation to an 
employee must be compensation received exclusively as wages by an 
employee for services performed in the course of employment for his 
employer; 
 
(b) "wages" shall mean the base salary or other base compensation of an 
employee paid to that employee for employment by an employer including 
pre-determined, non-discretionary, guaranteed payments paid by the 
employer to similarly situated employees, provided, that "wages" shall 
include payments made by the employer to the employee because of the 
character of the work, because of the employee's length of service, because of 
the time at which the work takes place as a condition of employment in a 
particular position, because of educational incentives, and payments for 
holding the training, certification, licensing or other educational incentives 
approved by the employer for the performance of services related to the 
position the employee holds and payments made by the employer to the 
employee calculated as a percentage of base pay; 
 
(c) Any amount, benefit or payment included in the definition of "regular 
compensation" by law or by regulation prior to July 1, 2009 and included in 
any applicable collective bargaining agreement or individual contract for 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.03 Regular Compensation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
employment in effect on May 1, 2009, shall continue to be included in the 
definition of "regular compensation" during the term of that collective 
bargaining agreement or contract; provided, however, that any such 
amount, benefit or payment received after the term of said collective 
bargaining agreement or contract ends or after June 30, 2012, as the case 
may be, shall continue to be considered regular compensation unless such 
payment does not meet the criteria set forth in 840 CMR 15.03(3)(b) or is 
excluded by the provision of 840 CMR 15.03(3)(f); 
 
(d) Regular compensation shall include any part of the wages derived from 
federal grants except as provided in M.G.L. c. 2 and (2)(a)(xi); 
 
(e) Lump-sum retroactive payments which would have been wages if paid in 
the periods in which the services remunerated thereby were actually 
rendered will be allocated to said periods rather than being entirely 
attributed to the time of receipt for the purpose of determining a member's 
regular compensation; 
 
(f) "Wages" shall not include, without limitation, overtime, commissions, 
bonuses other than cost-of-living bonuses, amounts derived from salary 
enhancements or salary augmentation plans which will recur for a limited or 
definite term, indirect, in-kind or other payments for such items as housing, 
lodging, travel, clothing allowances, annuities, welfare benefits, lump sum 
buyouts for workers' compensation, job-related expense payments, 
automobile usage, insurance premiums, dependent care assistance, one- 
time lump sum payments in lieu of or for unused vacation or sick leave or 
the payment for termination, severance, dismissal or ally amounts paid as 
premiums for working holidays, except in the case of police officers, 
firefighters and employees of a municipal department who are employed as 
fire alarm signal operators or signal maintenance repairmen money paid for 
holidays shall be regarded as regular compensation, amounts paid as early 
retirement incentives or any other payment made as a result of the employer 
having knowledge of the member's retirement, tuition, payments in kind 
and all payments other than payment received by an individual from his 
employing unit for services rendered to such employing unit, regardless of 
federal taxability; provided further, that notwithstanding the foregoing, in 
the case of a teacher employed in a public day school who is a member of the 
teachers' retirement system, salary payable under the terms of an annual 
contract for additional services in such school and compensation for services 
rendered by a teacher in connection with a school lunch program or for 
services in connection with a program of instruction of physical education 
and athletic contests as authorized by M.G.L. c. 71, § 47 shall be regarded as 
"regular compensation" rather than as bonus or overtime and shall be 
included in the salary on which deductions are to be paid to the annuity 
savings fund of the teachers' retirement system. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.03 Regular Compensation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.03 Regular Compensation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
 
15.04. Benefit Calculation Factors 
 
PERAC, through its Actuary, is required to review the mortality table and interest rate used in the 
determination of the actuarial equivalence factors for Options A, B, and C on or before January 1, 
2014 and every 10 years thereafter. After the review, if changes are warranted, the Actuary will 
select a revised mortality table and/or a revised interest rate to be used in the determination of 
actuarial equivalence factors and develop such revised factors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.05. Board Credit Cards 
1. Retirement Boards may, by supplementary regulation, submitted to and 
approved by PERAC, authorize use of a credit card account issued to the Retirement 
Board. This regulation should specifically include the amount upon which prior 
spending authorization is required and the categories for which the credit card account 
can be used. 
 
2. Authorized users should be voted upon by the board and included in the board 
meeting minutes. No one other than an authorized user may utilize the board credit card 
account. 
 
3. Any personal use of said credit card account issued to the board is prohibited. 
 
4. The board credit card account shall not be used to obtain cash advances, bank 
checks, traveler’s checks, or electronic cash transfers. 
 
5. The credit card account billings shall be issued to the board office and any 
authorized user shall be required to provide receipts for all expenses included in the 
monthly statement within 10 business days of the statement date. If receipts are not 
provided, the authorized user will immediately reimburse the board for those items that 
appear on the credit card billing. 
 
6. Credit card accounts issued to the board may be used to purchase supplies or 
other items that the Board, the board members, or the board’s staff use on a regular basis 
in the performance of board-related duties. However, the board should follow a 
procurement process for the goods and services whenever possible. Credit card accounts 
issued to the board may also be used for board-related travel expenses, as described at 
840 CMR 2.00, et seq., or the supplementary regulations of the board. 
 
7. If the board credit card is lost or stolen, this must be immediately reported to the 
Board and to the financial institution issuing the card. 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.03 Regular Compensation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
8. The board must pay off the credit card account in full every month so as not to 
incur any interest on the account. 
 
9. The board’s supplementary regulation shall include a provision that continued or 
repeated non-conformance to this policy will result in cancellation of the credit card 
account and such other actions as appropriate. 
 
 
 
15.06. Board Debit Cards 
 
Retirement boards are prohibited from the use of debit cards for any purchases of goods 
or services. 
 
 
15.07 NON-DISABILITY HEARINGS BY A RETIREMENT BOARD 
 
(1) Purpose. The following procedures shall be used for all Board hearings not related to 
disability applications including, but not limited to, matters involving G.L. c. 32, §§ 15, 
16 (involuntary superannuation), 91, and 91A. 
(2) Notice. The retirement board shall give all parties at least 30 days notice of the time and 
place for the hearing and of the issues involved in the hearing. If the issues cannot be fully 
stated in advance of the hearing, they shall be fully stated as soon as practicable. 
(3) Discovery. Any party and any authorized representative shall, at any time after a hearing 
has been requested or ordered and after reasonable notice to the retirement board, be 
permitted to examine and/or copy, during normal business hours, any document in the 
case file pertaining to the member's file or the record of the hearing. All other discovery 
shall be at the discretion of the retirement board. A request for discovery may be made by 
any party at any time after a hearing has been requested or ordered. 
(4) Conduct of Hearing. Hearings shall be conducted in an informal manner that affords all 
parties an opportunity to present all information and argument relevant to the proceeding. 
(a) Presiding Officer. The chairperson of the retirement board, any other member of the 
board acting as chairperson, or any individual designated by the board, shall be the 
presiding officer and shall assure parties the right to call and question witnesses and 
introduce exhibits, and to present argument relevant to the proceeding. The presiding 
officer shall assure an orderly presentation of the evidence and argument and that a 
record is made of the hearing. 
(b) Continuances. The presiding officer may change the date, time or place of the hearing 
on his or her own motion or on the request of any party, upon due notice to all other 
parties, and may continue the hearing to a subsequent date to permit any party to 
present additional evidence, witnesses or other materials. At any time prior to decision, 
the presiding officer may reconvene the hearing for any purpose upon ten days written 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.03 Regular Compensation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
notice to all parties, stating therein the purposes for reconvening, and the date, time 
and place of the reconvened hearing. 
(c) Oaths; Rulings; Briefs. The presiding officer shall administer the oath or affirmation to 
witnesses, shall rule upon the admissibility of evidence and upon any requests for 
rulings, and may order that pre and/or post hearing written briefs be submitted by the 
parties . 
(d) The Record. All proceedings in connection with the hearing shall be recorded by 
electronic or stenographic means and such record shall be maintained as part of the 
hearing record. Transcripts or duplicate tapes of the proceedings shall be supplied to 
any party, upon request. At the discretion of the presiding officer, any party may be 
permitted to record the hearing (except, in the case of those hearings taking place at a 
meeting of the retirement board, those portions of the hearing which may be held in 
executive session) so long as this does not interfere with the conduct of the 
proceedings. All documents and other evidence received shall also become part of the 
record. 
(e) Executive Session. If a hearing occurs at a meeting of the retirement board, and if the 
subject of the hearing is such that the matter may proceed in executive session the 
board must first convene in open session for which notice has been given, a majority 
of the members of the board must vote to go into executive session and the vote of 
each member must be recorded on a roll call vote and entered into the minutes, the 
presiding officer must have stated the purpose for an executive session, and stated 
before the executive session if the board will reconvene after the executive session. In 
such executive session only the retirement board, the secretary and the retirement 
board's counsel, the parties and their authorized representatives and such other persons 
as the presiding officer shall deem necessary for the conduct of the hearing shall be 
permitted to be present. The records of the hearing in executive session shall not be 
made available to the public except in accordance with the board's regulations on 
privacy and confidentiality and such other laws or regulations as may be applicable to 
such records. 
(f) Evidence. 
1. General. The retirement board need not observe the rules of evidence observed by 
courts but shall observe the rules of privilege recognized by law. Evidence shall be 
admitted and given probative effect only if it is the kind of evidence on which 
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely upon. Unduly repetitious evidence may be 
excluded. 
2. Testimony; Stipulation. Witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation and shall be 
available for questions by all parties. If a witness cannot, as a practical matter, be 
available in person the witness shall be available and testify remotely using adequate 
electronic means as ordered by the presiding officer. Stipulations by the parties as to 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 15.03 Regular Compensation (Code of 
Massachusetts Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
any fact or as to the testimony that would be given by an absent witness may be 
offered and received as evidence. 
3. Documentary Evidence. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies 
or excerpts or by incorporation by reference at the discretion of the presiding officer. 
4. Taking Notice of Facts. The retirement board may take notice of any fact which may 
be judicially noticed by the courts, and any fact within the retirement board's 
specialized knowledge. Parties shall be notified and afforded an opportunity to contest 
any facts so noticed. 
5. Evidence to Be Part of Record. All evidence, including any records, reports and 
documents of the retirement board, to be considered in making a decision shall be 
offered and made a part of the record of the proceeding and the record shall at all times 
be open for inspection by any party or authorized representative during business hours. 
The retirement board may, with notice to all parties, require any party to submit 
additional evidence for the record and shall afford parties an opportunity to submit 
rebuttal evidence. 
(g) Subpoenas. 
1. Issuance. The presiding officer shall, within five days of a written request of a party, 
issue a subpoena requiring the attendance and testimony of a witness or the production 
of any evidence including books, records, correspondence or documents relating to 
any matter in question at the hearing. 
2. Request to Vacate. Any person subpoenaed may file a written request to the presiding 
officer to vacate or modify the subpoena. 
3. Decision on Request to Vacate or Modify Subpoena. The presiding officer shall notify 
all parties of the request to vacate or modify the subpoena and afford parties a 
reasonable time to respond. The presiding officer shall grant the request to vacate or 
modify the subpoena if the testimony or evidence subpoenaed does not relate with 
reasonable directness to any matter at issue in the proceeding or if the subpoena is 
otherwise unreasonable or oppressive. 
4. Failure to Comply with Subpoena. If any person fails to comply with a properly 
issued subpoena, the retirement board or the party requesting the issuance of the 
subpoena may petition the Superior Court for an order requiring compliance. 
 
(5) Written Decision. The presiding officer shall issue a written decision to the retirement board 
following the conclusion of the hearing. The Board shall vote and issue a decision following 
receipt of the Presiding Officer’s decision and provide the parties with the appropriate appeal 
rights. 
 
840 CMR 25.00 Field Examinations Of
 
 
840 CMR 25.00. Field Examinations of Contributory Retirement 
Systems 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
 
840 CMR 25.00: M.G.L. c. 7, § 50; c. 32, § 21. 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 25.01 Field Examinations of 
Contributory Retirement Systems (Code of Massachusetts 
Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
25.01. Field Examinations of Contributory Retirement Systems 
 
840 CMR 25.00 is the standard rule for the field examinations of contributory 
retirement systems promulgated by PERAC pursuant to M.G.L. c. 7, § 50(a) and c. 
32, § 21(1)(a). Except as otherwise provided by PERAC, or by statute, 840 CMR 
25.00 shall govern any examination of the financial condition of a contributory 
retirement system. 
 
Examinations of contributory retirement systems are conducted to determine the 
system's financial condition, to monitor performance under the terms of its legal, 
contractual and fiduciary requirements, and to examine the system's effectiveness 
in achieving the intended results established by M.G.L. c. 32. 
 
An examination of each system shall be conducted at intervals not exceeding every 
three years to ascertain the system's financial condition, its ability to fulfill its 
obligations, whether all parties in interest have complied with the laws applicable 
thereto, and whether the transactions of the board have been in accordance with the 
rights and equities of those in interest. 
 
The examination of a retirement system encompasses the period beginning on 
January 1 immediately following the ending date of the preceding M.G.L. 
c. 32, § 21(1)(a) examination. An examination of each intervening year of the audit 
period must be conducted as well as a review of the subsequent years as 
appropriate to ensure that the board is presently operating within the practices and 
procedures prescribed by PERAC and M.G.L. c. 32. 
 
Prior to the start of the examination, the Board's Administrator will be provided 
with the Internal Control Questionnaire prescribed by PERAC. This questionnaire 
is designed to assist in understanding and evaluating internal controls. It consists of 
general questions that apply to all retirement boards, however, it does not purport to 
cover all aspects of internal control present at a particular system. 
 
The board of any system may have an examination of its financial condition 
conducted by a certified public accountant or a public accountant selected by the 
board. Upon the employment of such person or firm, the board shall file said 
individual's or firm’s name and address with PERAC. 
 
Within ten days of making a report on the financial condition of the system to the 
board of such system, the individual or firm conducting the examination shall file 
a certified copy thereof with the PERAC. 
 
840 Mass. Code Regs. 25.01 Field Examinations of 
Contributory Retirement Systems (Code of Massachusetts 
Regulations (2021 Edition))
 
 
Any such examination conducted in accordance with 840 CMR 25.00 shall be 
deemed upon acceptance by PERAC to be the examination required by M.G.L. c. 
32, § 21(1)(a). To be so accepted by PERAC the examination(s) must cover the 
period beginning on January 1st of the year following the completion of the most 
recent examination conducted pursuant to said M.G.L. c. 32, § 21(1)(a), and 
ending on December 31st three years later. Acceptance is contingent upon 
PERAC’s review of the audit workpapers. 
 
In conducting an examination pursuant to 840 CMR 25.00, PERAC audit staff may 
utilize and rely on such portions of the report of an examination by a certified 
public accountant or public accountant selected by a retirement board as it deems 
appropriate. PERAC audit staff shall then examine areas supplemental to the 
board-selected accountant required by 840 CMR 25.00 and, together with the 
board-selected accountant’s work, it shall be deemed acceptable as the 
examination required by M.G.L. c. 32, § 21(1)(a).
