SENATE………………………………………..No. 2573 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
 
 
COMMUNICATION 
 
from 
 
MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
SUBMITTING PROPOSED REGULATIONS FOR 
 
RACING MEETING LICENSING 
205 CMR 15.00 
 
(under the provisions of section 9B of Chapter 128A 
of the General Laws) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
January 25, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
January 22, 2024 
 
VIA FIRST CLASS MAIL 
and EMAIL: (Senate.clerk@ma.state.us) (michael.d.hurley@state.ma.us ) 
 
The Honorable Michael D. Hurley 
Senate Clerk 
Office of the Senate Clerk 
24 Beacon Street 
Room 335- State House 
Boston, MA 02133 
 
Senate Clerk Hurley: 
 
Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 128A, §9B, the Massachusetts Gaming Commission (“Commission”) 
hereby files 205 CMR 15.00 – Racing Meeting Licensing. The proposed regulation would 
govern applications for racing meeting licenses under G.L. c. 128A. The regulations sections 
establish procedures for: the application’s requirements, the Commission’s evaluation of the 
application and its decision, the suitability of new and existing licensees and potential qualifiers, 
additional information and reporting requirements, and the withdrawal of an application. 
Additional sections have been reserved for future rulemaking. 
 
 These regulations are largely governed by M.G.L. c. 128A § 9. A public hearing was held 
 regarding these proposed amendments on January 9, 2024. If you have any questions or need additional 
 information, please feel free to reach me at judith.young@massgaming.gov or (617) 979-8426. 
Thank you for your attention to this matter. 
 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Massachusetts Gaming Commission 
By: 
 
 
Judith A. Young, Esq. 
Associate General Counsel 
 
 
Enclosures 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
1 
 
 
205 CMR 15.00: RACING MEETING LICENSING 
 
Section 15.01: Authority and Definitions 
Section 15.02: Racing Meeting License Application 
Section 15.03: Evaluation of Application and Decision 
Section 15.04: Suitability of New and Existing Licensees, and Qualifiers 
Section 15.05: Advance Deposit Wagering; Licensure, Review and Authorization (RESERVED) 
Section 15.06: Licensing, Registration, and Fees for Owners, Trainers, Stable Employees, 
Authorized Agents, Vendors and Racing Officials (RESERVED) 
Section 15.07: Financial Payments, Outs, and Requests for Capital Improvement or 
Reimbursement (RESERVED) 
Section 15.08: Additional Information and Cooperation of Racing Meeting Applicants and 
Licensees 
Section 15.09: Withdrawal of Application For License To Hold Or Conduct A Racing Meeting 
 
 
15.01 Authority and Definitions 
 
(1) Authority. 205 CMR 15.00 is issued pursuant to G.L. c. 128A, § 9, and G.L. c. 128C, 
§ 8. 
(2) Definitions. As used in 205 CMR 15.00, the following words and phrases shall have 
the following meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Words and 
phrases not defined below shall have the meaning given to them in G.L. c. 128A, § 1 
or G.L. c. 128C, § 1, 205 CMR 202.02, or 205 CMR 102.00, if any, unless the context 
clearly requires otherwise. In the event of any conflict between those provisions, any 
definition in G.L. c. 128A, § 1 shall be given priority, followed by G.L. c. 128C, § 1, 
205 CMR 202.02, and 205 CMR 102.00, in that order, unless the context clearly 
requires otherwise. 
Applicant means an applicant for a racing meeting license. 
Application means an application for a racing meeting license. 
Application deadline means the first day of October of the calendar year preceding 
the calendar year for which the application requests a license to be issued. 
Authorized individual means, if the applicant is an individual, such individual; if two 
or more individuals or a partnership, one of such individuals or by a member of such 
partnership, as the case may be; if a trust, a trustee of such trust; and, if an association 
or corporation, by the president or vice president thereof. 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
2 
 
BED means a Business Entity Disclosure Form by an authorized individual as 
described in 205 CMR 111.02: Business Entity Disclosure Form - Category 1 and 
Category 2 Entity Applicants and Holding/Intermediary Companies. 
License means a racing meeting license. 
Licensee means a racing meeting licensee. A licensee shall be considered a licensee 
through the full calendar year in which its license permits it to host racing meetings 
regardless of the date of its last scheduled racing meeting. 
Mass. Supp. means Massachusetts Supplemental Form as described in 205 CMR 
111.04. 
MJPHD means a Multi-jurisdictional Personal History Form as described in 205 
CMR 111.03: Multi-jurisdictional Personal History Form. 
Scoping survey means an Operator and Vendor Scope of Licensing – Initial Survey. 
Racing meeting license means a license to conduct a live racing meeting. 
Qualifier means a person whose qualification must be established in evaluating the 
suitability of an applicant in accordance with the standards and criteria set forth in 
M.G.L. c. 128A and 205 CMR 15.04. 
15.02 Racing Meeting License Application 
 
(1) Required Materials. An applicant must submit a fully executed original application to 
the Commission on or before the application deadline. All application materials shall 
be submitted in accordance with the instructions included in the relevant form or 
online. The Commission shall have no obligation to accept or review an incomplete 
application. Applicants shall, at a minimum, submit the following completed 
materials as part of their application: 
(a) If the applicant is not currently a licensee: 
(i) a scoping survey; 
(ii) For each designated (or, with the permission of the Bureau, 
anticipated) entity qualifier: a BED; 
(iii) For each designated (or, with the permission of the Bureau, 
anticipated) individual qualifier: 
(a) An MJPHD; and 
(b) A Mass. Supp. 
(b) A racing meeting license application form, in accordance with 205 CMR 15.02 
and consistent with M.G.L. c. 128A and M.G.L. c. 128C, signed and sworn to 
by an authorized individual; 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
3 
 
(c) A $300 licensing fee pursuant to M.G.L. c. 128A, § 4; 
(d) A certified check or bank draft, or electronic equivalent, payable to the 
Commission, weekly in advance for the full amount of the license fee required 
by G.L. c. 128A; 
(e) A bond payable to the Commission in the amount of $125,000 with a surety or 
sureties approved by the Commission conditioned upon the payment of all 
sums which may become payable to the commission under this chapter. 
(2) Sequence of submissions. An applicant who is not currently a licensee: 
(a) may submit the scoping survey prior to and separately from any other required 
materials; and 
(b) may submit any BEDs, MJPHDs, and Mass. Supps. required by 205 CMR 
15.02(1)(a)(ii)-(iii); 
i. prior to and separately from the materials required under 205 CMR 
15.02(1)(b)-(f); and 
ii. Either for all qualifiers at once, or, with the permission of the Bureau, 
on a per-qualifier basis. 
(c) An applicant who submits any forms prior to and separately from other 
application materials in accordance with 205 CMR 15.02(2)(a) or (b) must also 
submit an attestation signed and sworn to that the applicant intends in good 
faith to submit a fully executed original application on or before the application 
deadline, and acknowledging that if the applicant fails to do so without good 
cause, the Commission may charge the applicant for any administrative and 
investigatory costs incurred in evaluating those application forms the applicant 
did submit. Only one such attestation shall be required per application 
regardless of the volume or nature of forms submitted early. 
(3) Racing Meeting License Application Form requirements. 
(a) For any applicant, the racing meeting license application form shall require the 
following: 
(i) The name of the applicant; 
(ii) The post office address of the applicant, and if a corporation or 
corporate entity, the name of the state under the laws of which it is 
incorporated or formed, the location of its principal place of 
business and the names and addresses of its directors and 
stockholders, members, or directors; 
(iii) The location of the racetrack where it is proposed to hold or 
conduct such meeting; 
(iv) An explanation of the ownership of the real property on which the 
race track is proposed to be constructed or operated, and the 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
4 
 
applicant’s rights to construct or operate the race track on said real 
property; 
(v) Documentation sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant has 
received: 
(a) municipal approval pursuant to M.G.L. c. 128A, § 13A; 
and 
(b) an affirmative county vote pursuant to M.G.L. c. 128A, § 
14; 
(vi) The calendar year in which the applicant anticipates conducting the 
meeting, and the specific days on which it intends or anticipates 
holding or conducting such a meeting; 
(vii) The hours of each day between which it is intended to hold or 
conduct racing at such meeting subject to the restrictions described 
in M.G.L. c. 128A; 
(viii) An attestation signed and sworn to that the applicant will comply, 
in case such license be issued, with all applicable laws and with all 
applicable rules and regulations prescribed by the Commission, 
and that the applicant shall have an affirmative obligation to abide 
by every statement made in the application to the Commission 
should it be awarded a license; 
(ix) An attestation signed and sworn to that the applicant will comply, 
in case such license shall be issued, with all affirmative 
representations, promises or inducements made to governing 
bodies, government officials of the host and surrounding 
communities or local organizations and any mitigation agreements, 
formal or informal; and 
(x) Such other information or certifications as the Commission may 
require. 
 
(b) For any applicant who proposes to hold a racing meeting at a race track where 
the applicant has not previously held a racing meeting, the racing meeting 
license application form shall also require the following: 
(i) A summary of the project and racing facilities including a 
description of the proposed financing and source(s) of capital; 
(ii) Submission of feasibility, viability, economic impact/development 
studies including projected revenues, purses, handles, tax 
payments, attendance, and employment figures; 
(iii) Submission of designs, traffic, and environmental impact studies, 
including information relative to the safety and security of patrons, 
employees, occupational licensees, and horses; 
(iv) A detailed description of the race track that will be constructed and 
an indication of the type of grounds the horses will be raced upon, 
whether dirt, turf or synthetic, including a timeline for completion 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
5 
 
and the name and qualifications of the entity or individual 
overseeing construction; 
(v) Information relative to the public interest and benefits associated 
with the conduct of the proposed racing meeting including the 
existence of, or the applicant’s plan to execute, a purse agreement 
with a representative horsemen’s organization; any support or 
opposition to the proposal has received from the host and nearby 
communities; and the applicant’s plan to attract and employ a 
diverse workforce in both construction and operational phases of 
the proposal, including through use of vendors. 
(vi) Information or a statement as to whether the applicant plans on 
entering into a Project Labor Agreement(s); 
(vii) Information relative to the proposed pari-mutuel wagering plan for 
live racing, simulcasting, and advance account deposit wagering; 
(viii) Information relative to the proposed responsible gaming initiatives 
to be offered on the premises; 
(ix) Information relative to the applicant’s plans to seek or not seek a 
Category 2 Sports Wagering license; 
(x) Any agreements, written or otherwise, that the applicant has made 
or executed with racing governing bodies, the municipality where 
the applicant proposes to hold racing meetings, other 
municipalities, or any other entities; and 
(xi) Such other information or certifications as the Commission may 
require. 
(c) For any applicant who is not currently a licensee, or who has not previously 
been found durably or temporarily suitable in accordance with this 205 CMR 
to hold a license, the racing meeting license application form shall also require 
the following: 
(xii) An attestation signed and sworn to that if the form described in 205 
CMR 15.02(1)(a)(i) is not deemed administratively sufficient by 
May 1, the applicant acknowledges the Commission may not have 
adequate time to assess the applicant’s suitability, and that this may 
result in denial of the application; 
(xiii) An attestation signed and sworn to that if the forms described in 
205 CMR 15.02(1)(a)(ii)-(iii) are not deemed administratively 
sufficient by August 1, the applicant acknowledges the 
Commission may not have adequate time to assess the applicant’s 
suitability, and that this may result in denial of the application; and 
(xiv) Such other information or certifications as the Commission may 
require. 
15.03 Evaluation of Application and Decision 
 
(1) Pre-Application Consultation. The Commission or its designees may conduct one or 
more consultation meetings or information sessions with an applicant or prospective 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
6 
 
applicant to provide guidance on application procedures, including the requirements 
of G.L. c. 128A or 128C, or 205 CMR 15.00. In addition, the Commission may use 
other methods to respond to inquiries regarding the application process, such as 
publishing responses to questions submitted by any applicant. 
(2) Administrative Sufficiency Review. The Division of Licensing will review 
application materials for administrative sufficiency as they are submitted. 
(a) Administrative sufficiency review – how undertaken. 
(i) When determining whether the application materials to be 
reviewed at any stage are administratively sufficient, the Division 
of Licensing shall review the forms and determine whether all 
information or materials required to be provided in response to 
each question or request have been submitted. 
(ii) If any application materials to be reviewed in a stage are 
determined to be insufficient: 
(a) The Licensing Division shall notify the applicant in writing 
by email or first-class mail. The notification shall specify 
the deficiencies within the materials. 
(b) Until the application deadline passes, the applicant shall 
have the right to submit corrected materials to cure the 
deficiencies. 
(c) After the application deadline passes, the applicant must 
request leave from the Commission or its designee to 
submit corrected materials to cure the specified 
deficiencies, and must submit any corrected materials 
within the time allowed by the Commission or its designee. 
(d) The Commission or its designee shall not grant leave to 
submit proof of approvals required under G.L. c. 128A, 
§§ 13A and 14. 
(b) Positive determination of administrative sufficiency – significance. A positive 
determination of administrative sufficiency shall not constitute a finding with 
respect to the accuracy of the information submitted and shall not bar a request 
for further information by the Commission, the Bureau or their agents and 
employees with respect to the application. 
(3) Review Procedures. In reviewing the merits of the application, the Commission may, 
at such times and in such order as the Commission deems appropriate, take some or 
all of the following actions: 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
7 
 
(a) Refer the application, or any parts thereof, for advice and recommendations, to 
any or all of the following: 
(i) The Executive Director; 
(ii) The Bureau; 
(iii) Any office, agency, board, council, commission, authority, 
department, instrumentality, or division of the commonwealth; 
(iv) Commission staff; and 
(v) Any consultant retained by the Commission to aid in the review of 
the application; 
(b) Retain, or authorize the Executive Director or the Executive Director's 
designee to retain such professional consultants (including without limitation 
financial and accounting experts, legal experts, racing experts, contractor 
investigators, and other qualified professionals) as the Commission in its 
discretion deems necessary and appropriate to review the request and make 
recommendations; and 
(c) Require or permit, in the Commission’s discretion, the applicant to provide 
additional information and documents. 
(4) Public Meetings Regarding Applications 
(a) Pursuant to G.L. c. 128A, § 3, the Commission shall not issue a license without 
holding at least one public meeting in the municipality where the applicant 
proposes to hold a racing meeting. 
(b) The Commission may conduct one or more other meetings to: 
(i) receive public feedback on the application; 
(ii) allow the applicant to make a presentation; and 
(iii) allow the applicant to respond to questions or public comments. 
(5) Evaluation of the Application by the Commission. Once an application is deemed 
administratively sufficient, regardless of whether the application deadline has passed, 
the Commission shall commence a substantive evaluation of its contents. The 
Commission may utilize any technical or expert assistance it deems necessary to aid 
in its review. 
(a) The Commission shall analyze the factors and considerations set out in 205 
CMR 15.01, and G.L. c. 128A, § 3(i) in no particular order, and giving any 
particular weights, to any factor in order to make a determination as to whether 
a license awarded to the applicant would benefit the Commonwealth. These 
factors include but are not limited to: 
(i) Whether the application meets the requirements of G.L. c. 128A; 
(ii) Whether the applicant has adequately answered the questions in 
the application; 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
8 
 
(iii) Whether the application meets the factors set out in G.L. c. 128A, 
§ 3(i): 
(a) The applicant’s financial ability to successfully operate a 
race track; 
(b) The impact of the application on the maximization of state 
revenues; 
(c) The suitability of the racing facilities for operation at the 
time of the year for which dates are assigned; 
(d) The circumstance that large groups of spectators require 
safe and convenient facilities; 
(e) The interest of members of the public in racing competition 
honestly managed and of good quality; 
(f) The necessity of having and maintaining proper physical 
facilities for racing meetings; and 
(g) The economic interest and investments of those who in 
good faith have provided and maintain such facilities; 
(iv) Whether the Applicant is financially responsible, able to meet 
obligations to the Commonwealth, has suitable and safe facilities 
for the service of patrons, and is likely to conduct racing in 
accordance with approved practices and in a manner consistent 
with the public safety, health, morals, and welfare, including the 
suitability of the Applicant and its leadership to hold or conduct a 
racing meeting; 
(v) The reputation for honest dealing, and the gaming, racing, or sports 
wagering history of the Applicant and its qualifiers; 
(vi) Whether granting the application would result in an undesirable 
concentration of ownership of racing facilities within the 
Commonwealth; 
(vii) Whether the application would have an adverse impact upon the 
integrity of the racing industry; 
(viii) The applicant’s proposed measures related to responsible 
wagering, including: 
(a) The Applicant’s responsible wagering policies; 
(b) The Applicant’s advertising and promotional plans; and 
(c) The Applicant’s history of demonstrated commitment to 
responsible wagering; 
(ix) The Applicant’s willingness to foster racial, ethnic, and gender 
diversity, equity, and inclusion, including: 
(a) Within the applicant’s workforce; 
(b) Through the applicant’s supplier spend; and 
(c) In the applicant’s corporate structure; 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
9 
 
(x) any other relevant considerations the Commission deems 
appropriate, per M.G.L. c. 128A, § 2. 
(b) The Commission shall deliberate on license applications in an adjudicatory 
proceeding pursuant to 205 CMR 101.01: Hearings Before the Commission. 
(6) Determinations on Applications. 
(a) After evaluating an application in accordance with 205 CMR 15.03(5), the 
Commission may: 
(i) Award the applicant a license, subject to conditions in accordance 
with G.L. c. 128A and 128C, and 205 CMR; or 
(ii) Deny the application for any of the reasons set out in G.L. c. 128A 
and 128C, and 205 CMR. 
(b) The Commission shall not award a license without first having found the 
applicant durably suitable in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(1) within the 
current or prior four calendar years, or having found the applicant temporarily 
suitable in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(2) within the last calendar year; 
provided, the Commission may make either finding simultaneously with the 
decision to award a license in accordance with 205 CMR 15.03(6)(a)(i). 
(7) Provisions Applicable to All Licensing Determinations. Upon granting an application, 
the Commission shall prepare and file its decision, and shall issue a statement of the 
reasons for the grant, including specific findings of fact, and noting any conditions of 
licensure imposed pursuant to G.L. c. 128A, or 128C. 
(a) Upon denial of an application, the Commission shall prepare and file its 
decision and, if requested by the applicant, shall further prepare and file a 
statement of the reasons for the denial, including specific findings of fact. 
(b) For purposes of 205 CMR and G.L. c. 128A, or 128C, the award of a Racing 
Meeting License shall be deemed to have occurred immediately upon a 
majority vote by the Commission to issue the license, unless otherwise 
determined by the Commission. 
(c) License conditions. 
(i) All licenses shall be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(a) That the licensee comply with all terms and conditions of 
its license; 
(b) That the licensee comply with G.L. c. 128A, c. 128C, and 
all rules and regulations of the Commission; and 
(c) That the licensee, and its qualifiers, not become, or be 
found, unsuitable. 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
10 
 
(ii) The Commission may impose any other appropriate condition on a 
license. 
 
15.04 Suitability of New and Existing Licensees, and Qualifiers 
(1) Durable suitability determinations. 
(a) An applicant or qualifier shall have the duty to establish its durable 
suitability by clear and convincing evidence. 
(b) No applicant shall be determined to be durably suitable in accordance with 
205 CMR 15.04(1)(a) unless and until all qualifiers identified in 205 CMR 
15.04(6) have been found by the Commission durably suitable in 
accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(1)(a) within the current or prior four 
calendar years. 
(c) Investigation. Before the Commission may determine that an applicant or 
qualifier is durably suitable in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(1), the 
Bureau shall conduct an investigation into the qualifications and suitability 
of the applicant. At the completion of the Bureau’s investigation, it shall 
submit a written report to the Commission, which will include 
recommendations and findings of fact relative to the suitability of the 
applicant or qualifier. 
(d) The Commission shall make any finding of durable suitability in 
accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(1) after an adjudicatory proceeding 
pursuant to 205 CMR 101.00: M.G.L. c. 23K Adjudicatory Proceedings. 
(e) After the proceedings under 205 CMR 15.04(1)(d), the Commission shall 
issue a written determination of durable suitability as follows: 
(i) Negative Determination. If the Commission finds that an applicant 
or qualifier failed to meet its burden of demonstrating its durable 
suitability, the Commission, in its sole discretion, shall either: 
(a) issue a negative determination of suitability; or 
(b) request that the applicant or qualifier submit a certification 
in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(2)(b) and, as 
appropriate, that the Bureau conduct an investigation in 
accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(2)(c), and thereafter 
consider whether the applicant or qualifier is temporarily 
suitable in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(2). 
(ii) Positive Determination. If the Commission finds that an applicant 
or qualifier has met its burden of demonstrating its durable 
suitability, the Commission shall issue a positive determination of 
durable suitability which may include conditions and restrictions. 
(2) Temporary suitability determinations. 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
11 
 
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of 205 CMR 15.04, the Commission, 
in its sole discretion, may deem an applicant or qualifier temporarily 
suitable, until the end of the calendar year in which the applicant proposes 
to hold a racing meeting based on a certification pursuant to 205 CMR 
15.04(2)(b) and an investigatory report pursuant to 205 CMR 15.04(2)(c). 
(i) No applicant shall be determined to be temporarily suitable in 
accordance with this 205 CMR 15.04(2)(a) unless and until all 
qualifiers identified in 205 CMR 15.04(6) have been found durably 
suitable in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(1)(b) or temporarily 
suitable in accordance with this 205 CMR 15.04(2)(a). 
(ii) Any evaluation of whether an applicant or qualifier is temporarily 
suitable shall take place in a public meeting, unless the applicant or 
qualifier requests that the evaluation take place after an 
adjudicatory proceeding held pursuant to 205 CMR 1.01. 
(b) To be found temporarily suitable in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(2), 
the applicant or qualifier must certify: 
(i) that it understands it may be denied a license or have a license 
revoked if it has willfully, knowingly, recklessly, or intentionally 
provided false or misleading information to the Commission; 
(ii) that, under pains and penalties of perjury, to the best of its 
reasonable knowledge and belief, it is suitable to hold a license 
pursuant to G.L. c. 128A and 205 CMR 15.04; and 
(iii) an applicant certifies, under pains and penalties of perjury, that to 
the best of its reasonable knowledge and belief, all of its qualifiers 
are also suitable to hold a license pursuant to G.L. c. 128A, and 
205 CMR 15.04. 
(c) Before the Commission may determine that an applicant or qualifier is 
temporarily suitable in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(2), the Bureau 
shall conduct an investigation into the qualifications and suitability of the 
applicant or qualifier. The investigation may be limited to a review of the 
applicant or qualifier’s 205 CMR 15.04(2)(b) certification; an applicant’s 
self-disclosed licensing and compliance history in other jurisdictions; self-
disclosed open litigation involving an applicant; and an open-source check 
concerning the applicant or, if a natural person, a qualifier. At the 
completion of the Bureau’s investigation, it shall submit a written report to 
the Commission. The Bureau’s report may be redacted consistent with the 
Massachusetts Public Records Law, M.G.L. c. 66, and other sources of 
law. 
(d) After evaluating whether the applicant or qualifier is temporarily suitable 
in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(2)(d): 
(i) If the Commission finds the applicant or qualifier temporarily 
suitable: the Commission shall issue a written determination of 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
12 
 
temporary suitability for the applicant or qualifier. The 
determination may include conditions and restrictions. 
(ii) Otherwise: the Commission may issue a negative determination of 
suitability. 
(3) In determining whether a person is suitable, the Commission shall evaluate and 
consider the overall reputation of the person, including, without limitation, and on the 
basis of a report from the Bureau, sworn attestations, or other information or evidence 
available to the Commission: 
(a) the person’s integrity, honesty, good character and reputation; 
(b) the person’s financial stability, integrity, and background; 
(c) whether the person has a history of compliance with racing or other 
gaming or sports wagering requirements in other jurisdictions; 
(d) whether the person, at the time of the request, is a defendant in litigation; 
(e) whether the person is ineligible to hold a license under 205 CMR 15.04(4), 
or M.G.L. c. 128A; 
(f) whether the person has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; 
(g) whether, and to what extent, the person has associated with members of 
organized crime and other persons of disreputable character; 
(h) whether the person has failed to demonstrate responsible business 
practices in any jurisdiction; 
(i) whether awarding a license to the applicant would have an adverse impact 
upon the integrity of the racing industry; 
(j) whether awarding a license to the applicant would have an adverse impact 
on the interest of members of the public in racing competition honestly 
managed and of good quality; and 
(k) the extent to which the person have cooperated with the Bureau during the 
review of the Racing Meeting License Application. 
(4) The Commission shall determine that an applicant is unsuitable if the applicant or one 
of its qualifiers: 
(a) has knowingly made a false statement of a material fact to the 
Commission or IEB; 
(b) has had a license revoked by any governmental authority responsible for 
regulation of racing or associated pari-mutuel wagering activities or 
gaming or sports wagering activities; 
(c) has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving embezzlement, 
theft, fraud, perjury or a gambling-related offense; 
(d) has not demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Commission financial 
responsibility sufficient to adequately meet the requirements of the 
proposed enterprise; 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
13 
 
(e) has affiliates or close associates that would not qualify for a license, or 
whose relationship with the applicant may pose an injurious threat to the 
interests of the Commonwealth. 
(5) Persons Required to be Qualified. The following persons shall be qualifiers for any 
application: 
(a) If the applicant is a corporation: 
(i) Each officer; 
(ii) Each inside director; 
(iii) Any person owning, or having another beneficial or proprietary 
interest in, 10% or more of the common stock of the applicant, or a 
holding, intermediary or subsidiary company of such company; 
and 
(iv) In the judgment of the Division of Licensing after consultation 
with the Bureau, any person with significant and substantial 
responsibility for the applicant’s business under the jurisdiction of 
the Commission, or having the power to exercise significant 
influence over decisions concerning the applicant’s operations in 
the Commonwealth. 
(b) If the applicant is a limited liability corporation: 
(i) Each member; 
(i) Each transferee of a member’s interest; 
(ii) Any other holder of a beneficial or proprietary interest of 10% or 
more in the applicant; 
(iii) Each manager; and 
(iv) In the judgment of the Division of Licensing after consultation 
with the Bureau, any person with significant and substantial 
responsibility for the applicant’s business under the jurisdiction of 
the Commission or having the power to exercise significant 
influence over decisions concerning the prospective applicant’s 
operations in the Commonwealth. 
(c) If the applicant is a partnership: 
(i) Each partner; 
(ii) Any other holder of a beneficial or proprietary interest of 10% or 
more in the applicant; and 
(iii) In the judgment of the Division of Licensing after consultation 
with the Bureau, any person with significant and substantial 
responsibility for the applicant’s Business under the jurisdiction of 
the Commission or having the power to exercise significant 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
14 
 
influence over decisions concerning the applicant’s operations in 
the Commonwealth. 
(6) Other Qualifiers. The Commission may, in its sole discretion, require other persons 
that have a business association of any kind with the applicant to undergo a qualifier 
review and determination process. These persons may include, but are not limited to, 
holding, intermediary or subsidiary companies of the applicant. 
(7) Waivers. In addition to any other exception or exemption under 205 CMR 15.04, 
upon written petition, the Commission may waive the requirement to be qualified as a 
qualifier under 205 CMR 15.04(5)-(6) for: 
(a) Institutional investors holding up to 15% of the stock of the applicant, or 
holding, intermediary or subsidiary company thereof, upon a showing by the 
person seeking the waiver that it purchased the securities for investment 
purposes only and does not have any intention to influence or affect the affairs 
or operations of the applicant or holding, intermediary or subsidiary company 
thereof. Provided, however, any institutional investor granted a waiver which 
subsequently determines to influence or affect the affairs or operations of the 
applicant, or a holding, intermediary or subsidiary company thereof shall 
provide not less than 30 days’ notice to the Commission of such intent and 
shall file an application and may be subject to the licensing requirements of 
205 CMR 15.00, 3.00 and 4.00 respectively before taking any action that may 
influence or affect the affairs of the applicant or a holding, intermediary or 
subsidiary company; or 
(b) Any person who, in the opinion of the Bureau or the Commission, cannot 
exercise control or provide direction to an applicant or a holding, intermediary 
or subsidiary company thereof. 
(8) Persons Deemed Suitable. 
(a) Any person may be deemed durably suitable for purposes of M.G.L. c. 128A 
and 205 CMR without an additional finding of suitability pursuant to CMR 
15.04 if they were previously: 
(i) qualified pursuant to M.G.L. c. 23K or 205 CMR 116.00; or 
(ii) found suitable pursuant to 205 CMR 215.01(1). 
(b) Any person may be deemed temporarily suitable for purposes of M.G.L. c. 
128A and 205 CMR without an additional finding of suitability pursuant to 
CMR 15.04 if they were previously found preliminarily suitable pursuant to 
205 CMR 215.01(2). 
(9) Qualification of New Qualifiers. No person requiring qualification pursuant to 205 
CMR 15.04 may perform any duties or exercise any powers relating to the position 
that said qualifier is seeking to assume for a licensee unless the person notifies the 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
15 
 
Bureau in writing within 30 days of appointment to the position. Such notification 
shall be accompanied by an applicable business entity or personal disclosure form, 
specified by the Bureau. Following such notification and submission of the completed 
form, the person may continue to perform duties and exercise powers relating to the 
position pending qualification. 
(a) A person with reason to believe that their new position with an applicant 
or licensee may require qualification pursuant to 205 CMR 15.04 shall 
notify the Bureau in writing within 30 days of appointment to the position. 
Such notification shall be accompanied by a summary of the 
responsibilities and/or features of the position. The Bureau shall determine 
whether the person shall be designated a qualifier pursuant to 205 CMR 
15.04(5) – (6) and shall notify the person of such designation in writing. 
Within 30 days of designation as a qualifier, the person shall submit a 
completed personal disclosure form. Following submission of the 
completed form, the person may continue to perform duties and exercise 
powers relating to the position pending qualification. 
(b) The Bureau shall review the forms submitted by the new qualifier, as well 
as such other information that the Bureau may request, and, upon 
completion of its investigation, shall make a recommendation in 
accordance with 205 CMR 15.04(1)(c) whether the new qualifier meets 
the standards for suitability. 
(c) Upon notification by the Bureau of a determination that reasonable cause 
exists to believe the qualifier may not ultimately be found suitable, an 
applicant shall promptly remove the qualifier from his or her position until 
such time as the Commission makes its final determination on suitability. 
(10) Internal Review of Determinations. An applicant or qualifier may request review 
of any determination made by the Bureau in accordance with either 205 CMR 
15.04(5)-(7) or 205 CMR 15.04(9) to the Commission, by filing a petition on a form 
prescribed by the Commission. The Commission shall decide the question at a public 
meeting on the matter at which it may allow representatives of the petitioner and 
Bureau to testify. 
(11) Unsuitable qualifiers. An unsuitable qualifier may not hold an interest in a license. 
A licensee’s articles of organization or other document governing the sale or transfer 
of securities or other interests shall contain provisions in a form approved by the 
Commission stating that the sale, assignment, transfer, pledge or other disposition of 
any security issued by it is conditional and shall be ineffective if disapproved by the 
Commission. Further, a licensee shall have a mechanism approved by the 
Commission in place by which it may effectuate divestiture or redemption of 
securities, or a like process, in the event of a negative determination of suitability 
being issued to a person required to be qualified. 
(12) Transfers of interest in licenses and licensees. Prior to giving written approval to 
a sale, transfer, or conveyance of a beneficial or legal interest in a license or licensee 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
16 
 
in accordance with G.L. c. 128A, § 11C, the Commission must find the transferee 
durably or temporarily suitable in accordance with 205 CMR 15.04 as though the 
transferee was an applicant or qualifier for a new license. 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
M.G.L. c. 128A, §§ 2, 3(i), 5C; and M.G.L. c. 128C. 
 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
17 
 
15.05: Advance Deposit Wagering; Licensure, Review and Authorization (RESERVED) 
15.06: Licensing, Registration, and Fees for Owners, Trainers, Stable Employees, Authorized 
Agents, Vendors and Racing Officials (RESERVED) 
15.07: Financial Payments, Outs, and Requests for Capital Improvement or Reimbursement 
(RESERVED) 
 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
M.G.L. c. 128A, §§ 2, 3(i), 5C; and M.G.L. c. 128C. 
 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
18 
 
 
 
PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK 
 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
19 
 
 
15.08: Additional Information and Cooperation of Racing Meeting Applicants and Licensees 
 
(1) The Commission, the Bureau or their agents and employees may request additional 
information and documents from an applicant or its qualifiers, or any other person 
associated with the applicant whose licensure or registration is required under M.G.L. 
c. 128A and 128C or 205 CMR, throughout the application review process. Failure by 
the applicant, qualifier, or other person to timely submit the additional information as 
requested by the Commission, the Bureau or their agents and employees may be 
grounds for denial of the application. 
(2) All applicants, licensees, registrants, qualifiers, or other person whose licensure or 
registration is required under M.G.L. c. 128A and 128C, or 205 CMR shall comply 
with all requests of the Commission, the Bureau and their agents and employees for 
information and documents as authorized by M.G.L. c. 128A and 128C, and 205 
CMR. 
(3) Applicants, licensees, registrants, and qualifiers, and other persons shall respond 
within ten days or within the time specified in an information request by the 
Commission, the Bureau, and their agents and employees, under 15.08(1) and 
15.08(2), to said information request. 
(4) All applicants, licensees, registrants, qualifiers and other persons shall have a 
continuing duty to provide all information and documents requested by the 
Commission, Bureau, and their agents and employees and to cooperate in any 
investigation or hearing conducted by the Commission, Bureau, and their agents and 
employees, as authorized by M.G.L. c. 23K section 7. 
(5) Once issued a positive determination of suitability, all licensees and qualifiers shall 
have a continuing duty to maintain suitability in accordance with 205 CMR 
15.04. Each licensee or qualifier shall have a continuing duty to notify and update the 
Bureau, in writing, within ten days of the occurrence, unless an alternative filing time 
is authorized by the executive director, or where applicable, after gaining knowledge 
of the following: 
(a) Any denial, suspension or revocation by a governmental authority in any 
jurisdiction of a racing-, gaming, or sports-wagering-related license, 
registration, certification, permit or approval held by or applied for by the 
licensee or qualifier; 
(b) Any discipline, including a fine or warning, related to racing, imposed upon the 
licensee or qualifier by any governmental authority in any jurisdiction; 
(c) Any fine related to racing assessed on any entity owned or operated by the 
parent to the licensee by any governmental authority in any jurisdiction. 
(d) Any arrest, indictment, charge or criminal conviction of any qualifier in any 
jurisdiction; 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
20 
 
(e) Any complaints, allegations, or notice of investigation thereof made or known 
to be contemplated by a governmental authority against the racing meeting 
licensee, qualifier, or any racing entity owned or operated by the parent to the 
licensee, of which the licensee or qualifier is or should reasonably be aware, 
involving conduct that if substantiated could reasonably lead to potential 
revocation or suspension of the license or approval held by the licensee, 
qualifier, or racing entity owned or operated by the parent to the licensee, in 
that jurisdiction and/or imposition of a fine of $50,000 or greater; 
(f) Any reports, complaints, allegations, or material legal proceedings made, 
commenced, or known to be contemplated by a governmental authority against 
the licensee or qualifier, of which the licensee or qualifier is or should 
reasonably be aware, involving conduct that if substantiated could reasonably 
lead to potential criminal charges including, but not limited to, allegations of 
theft or embezzlement; 
(g) Any information known or that should reasonably be known to the licensee or 
qualifier, including by way of receipt of a subpoena, that the licensee or 
qualifier is or may be the subject of a criminal investigation by a law 
enforcement or regulatory agency; 
(h) Any exclusion or barring of a qualifier from any casino, gaming establishment, 
or gambling/gaming related entity, or race track in any jurisdiction; however, 
this shall not include exclusions or barring of a qualifier which stem solely 
from the interest in, or position they hold with, the licensee; 
(i) The termination, suspension from employment, or other discipline of any 
qualifier or racing employee licensed in accordance with 205 CMR; 
(j) Any material pending legal proceedings required to be reported in accordance 
with 17 CFR 229.103 - (Item 103) Legal proceedings: For purposes of 205 
CMR 212.01(5)(j) the registrant referred to in 17 CFR 229.103 - (Item 103) 
shall be both the licensee and the parent company of the licensee as determined 
by the Bureau. Additionally, the licensee and each qualifier shall provide notice 
of any pending legal proceeding which includes any allegation of fraudulent 
conduct by the licensee or a qualifier, that may reasonably threaten the 
economic viability of the licensee or a qualifier, or that alleges a pattern of 
improper conduct by the licensee or a qualifier over a sustained period of time; 
(k) Any significant financial event related to a licensee or entity qualifier. For 
purposes of 205 CMR 15.08(5)(k), a significant financial event means a 
merger, acquisition, consolidation, debt restructuring, material change in debt 
rating by major credit rating agencies (US/International), legal entity change, 
material ownership change, the assessment of a fine or penalty of $250,000 or 
greater by the SEC or international equivalent, restatement of previously issued 
financial statement(s), late filing of financial statement(s) with the SEC or 
international equivalent, US or international equivalent bankruptcy petition, 
default of financial debt covenants and receivership, disposal of a material 
business segment or asset, or adverse action(s) taken by the IRS; 
(l) Issuance of an “Adverse” or “Qualified” audit opinion, or the international 
equivalent, by an independent accountant to the Racing Meeting Licensee or 
qualifier; 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
21 
 
(m) A change in accounting firm engaged to perform attestation and/or assurance 
services for the licensee or qualifier; and 
(n) Issuance of a delisting notice from a United States or international stock 
exchange relative to the licensee or qualifier. 
(6) If the Commission determines that an applicant, licensee, registrant, or qualifier has 
knowingly withheld information, knowingly failed to provide information or 
documents requested by the Commission, Bureau, or their agents and employees, 
knowingly provided materially false or misleading information to the Commission, 
the Bureau or their agents and employees, or knowingly failed to cooperate with any 
investigation or hearing conducted by the Commission, Bureau, or their agents and 
employees, the Commission may, with respect to such person: 
(a) Find that person ineligible to hold a license or registration or be qualified in 
connection with a license; 
(b) Suspend the relevant license, registration or qualification; or 
(c) Revoke the relevant license, registration or qualification. 
 
 
 
 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
22 
 
15.09 Withdrawal of Application For License To Hold Or Conduct A New Racing Meeting 
(1) Except as provided in 205 CMR 15.09(2), a written notice of withdrawal of an 
application may be filed by an applicant or qualifier at any time prior to final 
Commission action thereon. 
(2) Withdrawal requests submitted in accordance with 205 CMR 15.09(2) shall be 
permitted without the need for Commission approval except that if a hearing on 
suitability, temporary suitability, or an application has been requested by a party or 
directed by the Bureau or Commission, no withdrawal will be allowed without 
express Commission approval upon a finding of good cause: 
(3) If the Commission agrees to grant withdrawal under 205 CMR 15.09(2), the 
Commission may condition that withdrawal with appropriate terms it deems 
necessary, including, but not limited to, a period of time within which the applicant or 
qualifier may not re-apply. 
(4) The provisions of 205 CMR 111.05(4) governing the surrender of credentials shall 
govern the surrender of any credential issued under M.G.L. c. 128A and 128C, or the 
sections of 205 CMR governing racing.
