SENATE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 2726 
Senate, April 11, 2024– Report from the Massachusetts Gaming Commission (pursuant to Section 
9B of Chapter 128A of the General Laws) submitting proposed regulation 205 CMR 15.00: 
Procedures for the Approval of a Simulcast-Only Facility. 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
_______________ 
In the One Hundred and Ninety-Third General Court 
(2023-2024) 
_______________ 
 
April 2, 2024 
VIA FIRST CLASS MAIL 
and EMAIL: ( Senate.clerk@ma.state.us) (michael.d.hurley@state.ma.us ) 
 
The Honorable Michael D. Hurley 
Senate Clerk 
Office of the Senate Clerk 
24 Beacon Street 
Room 335- State House 
Boston, MA 02133 
 
Senate Clerk Hurley: 
Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 128A, §9B, the Massachusetts Gaming Commission (“Commission”) 
hereby files 205 CMR 15.00 – Procedures for the Approval of a Simulcast-Only Facility. 
The proposed regulation would govern the process by which the Commission receives, reviews, 
and evaluates requests for approval by a licensed simulcast entity to simulcast at a new location. 
The regulation is particularly concerned with input from the community or communities where 
the proposed facility will be located. 
These regulations are largely governed by M.G.L. c. 128A, § 9. A public hearing was held regarding 
these proposed amendments on March 5, 2024. If you have any questions or need additional 
information, please feel free to reach me at judith.young@massgaming.gov or (617) 979-8426. 
Thank you for your attention to this matter. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Massachusetts Gaming Commission 
By: 
Judith A. Young, Esq. 
Associate General Counsel 
Enclosures 
 
1 
205 CMR 16: PROCEDURES FOR THE APPROVAL OF A SIMULCAST-ONLY FACILITY 
 
16.01 Authority and Definitions 
16.02 Application Requirements 
16.03 Administrative Sufficiency Review 
16.04 Review Procedures 
16.05 Public Meetings Regarding the Site Approval Application 
16.06 Evaluation of the Site Approval Application by the Commission 
16.07 Site Approval Determinations 
16.08 Provisions Applicable to All Site Approval Determinations 
16.09 Conditions 
16.10 Application fee 
16.11 Interaction with Other Provisions of 205 CMR 
16.01 Authority and Definitions 
(1) Authority. 205 CMR 16.00 is issued pursuant to M.G.L. c. 128C, §§ 2, 8. 
(2) Definitions. As used in 205 CMR 16.00, the following words and phrases shall 
have the following meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Words and phrases not defined below shall have the meaning given them in 
M.G.L. c. 128A and M.G.L. c. 128C, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Words and 
phrases not defined below or in M.G.L. c. 128A or M.G.L. 
c. 128C shall have the meaning given to them in 205 CMR 102.00 or 205 CMR 202.00, unless the 
context clearly requires otherwise. 
Applicant means a racing meeting licensee who applies for site approval 
in accordance with this 205 CMR 16.00. 
Host community means a municipality in which a simulcasting facility is 
located or in which an applicant has proposed locating a new simulcasting 
facility. 
Simulcasting Facility means a facility operated by a racing meeting 
licensee and approved by the Commission for simulcast wagering. 
Site approval application shall mean a racing meeting licensee’s 
application for site approval. 
Site approval shall mean authorization in accordance with M.G.L. c. 
128C, § 2 to conduct simulcast wagering at a particular location. 
Surrounding community means a municipality abutting a host community. 
16.02 Application Requirements 
2 
(1) A site approval application shall be submitted using the appropriate application 
form or forms issued by the Commission, and in accordance with the instructions 
included in the application form. 
(2) The site approval application form shall require the following: 
(a) The location of the proposed simulcasting facility; 
(b) A detailed description of the proposed simulcasting facility; 
(c) An explanation of the ownership of the real property on which the 
proposed simulcasting facility is proposed to be constructed or operated, 
and the applicant’s rights to construct or operate the simulcasting facility 
on said real property; 
(d) Information relative to any proposed responsible gaming initiatives to be 
offered on the premises; 
(e) A schedule of any other state, municipal, or Federal environmental, land 
use, hospitality-related, or other permits, licenses, or approvals required 
for the development and operation of the proposed simulcasting facility; 
(f) Any agreements, written or otherwise, that the applicant has made or 
executed with racing governing bodies, the municipality where the 
applicant proposes to hold racing meetings, other municipalities, or any 
other entities; 
(g) A project schedule, including a date for the proposed simulcasting facility 
to become open for wagering, and a date for each proposed amenity or 
attraction to become available to the public; 
(h) The projected costs of developing the facility; 
(i) A traffic study performed for the proposed simulcasting facility; 
(j) An attestation signed and sworn to that the applicant will comply, should 
site approval be granted, with all applicable laws and with all applicable 
rules and regulations prescribed by the Commission, and that the applicant 
shall have an affirmative obligation to abide by every statement made in 
the application to the Commission should it be awarded a license; 
(k) An attestation signed and sworn to that the applicant will comply, should 
site approval be granted, with all affirmative representations, promises or 
inducements made to government officials of the host or and surrounding 
communities or local organizations and any mitigation agreements, formal 
or informal; and 
(l) Any other information required by the Commission. 
3 
(3) The site approval application form issued by the Commission may include 
information regarding how certain materials submitted in the course of the 
application may be withheld from public disclosure pursuant to M.G.L. c. 66, 
§ 10. 
(4) Pre-Application Consultation. The Commission or its designees may conduct one 
or more consultation meetings or information sessions with an applicant or 
prospective applicant to provide guidance on application procedures, including 
the requirements of G.L. c. 128A or 128C, or 205 CMR 16.00. In addition, the 
Commission may use other methods to respond to inquiries regarding the 
application process, such as publishing responses to questions submitted by any 
applicant. 
 
16.03 Administrative Sufficiency Review 
(1) The Division of Licensing will review each site approval application for 
administrative sufficiency. 
(2) If a site approval application is determined to be insufficient: 
 
(a) The Division shall notify the applicant by email. The notification shall 
specifically identify the deficiencies. 
(b) The applicant shall have the right to submit supplemental or corrected 
information to cure the deficiencies within sixty days. 
(c) Failure to cure the deficiencies may result in the administrative closure of 
the site approval application. 
(d) In the event that a site approval application is administratively closed 
under 205 CMR 16.03(2), the Division of Licensing or the Bureau will 
notify the applicant of the determination in writing. 
(3) A positive determination of administrative sufficiency shall not constitute a 
finding with respect to the accuracy of the information submitted, and shall not 
bar a request for further information by the Commission, the Bureau or their 
agents and employees with respect to the application. 
16.04 Review Procedures 
(1) In reviewing the merits of the site approval application, the Commission may, at 
such times and in such order as the Commission deems appropriate, take some or 
all of the following actions: 
(a) Refer the application, or any parts thereof, for advice and 
recommendations, to any or all of the following: 
(i) The Executive Director; 
4 
(ii) The Bureau; 
(iii) Any office, agency, board, council, commission, authority, 
department, instrumentality or division of the commonwealth; 
(iv) Commission staff; and 
(v) Any consultant retained by the Commission to aid in the review of 
the application; 
(b) Retain, or authorize the Executive Director or the Executive Director’s 
designee to retain, using the application fee and investigation 
reimbursements described in 205 CMR 16.10, such professional 
consultants (including without limitation financial and accounting experts, 
legal experts, racing experts, contractor investigators, and other qualified 
professionals) as the Commission in its discretion deems necessary and 
appropriate to review the request and make recommendations; and 
(c) Require or permit, in the Commission’s discretion, the applicant to 
provide additional information and documents. 
16.05 Public Meetings Regarding the Site Approval Application 
(0) The Commission shall conduct the following public meetings: 
(a) one meeting in each host community to receive public feedback from 
members of the host community or communities; and 
(b) at least one other meeting to receive public feedback. 
(1) The Commission may conduct one or more additional meetings to: 
(a) receive additional public feedback on the site approval application; 
(b) allow the applicant to make a presentation; or 
(c) allow the applicant approval to respond to questions or public comments. 
(2) At least two weeks prior to any meeting held in accordance with 205 CMR 
16.05(1)(a), the Commission shall provide a copy of the site approval application 
to the host community’s mayor and city council, town council, or select board. 
The site approval application may be redacted consistent with the Massachusetts 
Public Records Law, G.L. c. 66, and other sources of law. 
(3) Prior to any meeting held in accordance with this 205 CMR 16.05, the 
Commission will prescribe the manner in which it will receive comments from 
members of the public. 
16.06 Evaluation of the Site Approval Application by the Commission 
5 
(0) Once a submitted site approval application is deemed administratively complete, 
the Commission shall commence a substantive evaluation of its contents. The 
Commission may utilize any technical assistance it deems necessary to aid in its 
review. 
(1) The Commission shall deliberate on site approval applications in an adjudicatory 
proceeding pursuant to 205 CMR 101.01. 
(2) The Commission shall analyze the factors and considerations set out in 205 CMR 
16.05(5) in no particular order, and giving any particular weights, or no weight, to 
any factor. Those factors include but are not limited to: 
(a) The financial ability of the applicant to develop and operate the proposed 
simulcasting facility; 
(b) The maximization of state revenues; 
(c) The circumstance that simulcast wagering patrons require safe and 
convenient facilities; 
(d) The interest of members of the public in simulcast wagering honestly 
managed and of good quality; 
(e) The necessity of according fair treatment to the economic interest and 
investments of those who in good faith have provided and maintained 
simulcasting facilities; 
(f) The applicant’s business practices and business ability to establish and 
maintain a successful simulcasting facility; 
(g) Any support or opposition voiced by the municipal government or 
residents of the host community or communities; 
(h) Any projected benefits to, or impacts on, the host community or 
communities, and surrounding communities; and 
(i) Any other appropriate and pertinent factors. 
16.07 Site Approval Determinations 
(0) After evaluating the site approval application in accordance with 205 CMR 16.06, 
the Commission may: 
Approve the application; 
(b) Deny the application; or 

6 
(c) Postpone decision pending further analysis or the provision of additional 
information by the applicant, Commission staff, consultants to the 
Commission, or any other person. 
16.08 Provisions Applicable to All Site Approval Determinations 
(0) Upon granting an application, the Commission shall prepare and file its decision, 
and shall issue a statement of the reasons for the approval, including specific 
findings of fact, and noting any conditions of approval imposed under 205 CMR 
16.09. 
(1) Upon denial of an application, the Commission shall prepare and file its decision 
and, if requested by the applicant, shall further prepare and file a statement of the 
reasons for the denial, including specific findings of fact. 
(2) Site approval shall be deemed to have occurred immediately upon a majority vote 
by the Commission to approve the site, unless otherwise determined by the 
Commission. 
16.09 Conditions 
(0) All site approvals shall be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(a) That the licensee comply with all terms and conditions of the site 
approval; 
(b) That the licensee comply with M.G.L. c. 128A, c. 128C, and all rules and 
regulations of the Commission; 
(c) That the licensee consents to the Commission or its representative 
physically inspecting the progress of construction or development, subject 
to reasonable construction site safety rules, to determine the licensee’s 
compliance with the terms and conditions of the site approval, M.G.L. c. 
128A, M.G.L. c. 128C, or 205 CMR; 
(d) That the licensee shall grant access to, at any time, plans, specifications, 
submittals, contracts, financing documents or other records concerning the 
construction of the project or related infrastructure. The licensee shall 
provide the requested materials to the Commission or its representative 
within ten days of the Commission's request for such documents; 
(e) That the licensee shall not conduct simulcast wagering at the proposed 
simulcasting facility without an operation certificate, which shall not issue 
until the licensee has demonstrated to the Commission that it has complied 
with all requirements of M.G.L. c. 128A, M.G.L. c. 128C, 205 CMR, and 
all applicable laws. Such compliance includes, but is not limited to: 
7 
(i) The simulcasting facility has been built and is of a superior quality 
and complies with any applicable conditions of site approval; 
(ii) A copy of an emergency response plan that includes, but is not 
limited to, the elements listed in 205 CMR 151.01(3)(g) and which 
is filed with the Commission and with fire department and police 
department of the Host Community; or an update to such plan 
already filed pursuant to 205 CMR 151.01 or 205 CMR 
251.01(3)(d); 
(iii) A copy of the certificate of occupancy issued by a building 
commissioner or inspector of buildings of the host community in 
accordance with 780 CMR 111.00: Certificate of Occupancy that 
includes an approval under 521 CMR: Architectural Access Board, 
indicating the necessary use and occupancy to operate the 
simulcasting facility; as well as copies of any other permits 
required to be issued by the host community prior to the opening of 
a like facility; 
(iv) Compliance with any other condition imposed by the Commission 
to secure the objectives of M.G.L. c. 23N and 205 CMR. 
(2) The Commission may impose any other conditions on particular site 
approvals that it determines are appropriate to secure the objectives of M.G.L. 
c. 128A, 
M.G.L. c. 128C, and 205 CMR. 
16.10 Application fee 
(0) General provisions 
(a) An applicant shall pay the Commission a nonrefundable application fee of 
$25,000 to defray the costs associated with the processing and review of 
the site approval application; provided, however, that if the costs of 
processing and review exceed the initial application fee, the applicant shall 
pay the additional amount to the Commission within 30 days after 
notification of insufficient fees or the site approval application shall be 
rejected. 
(b) The applicant shall pay the non-refundable application fee of $25,000 by 
certified check or secure electronic funds transfer made payable to the 
“Massachusetts Gaming Commission.” The applicant shall submit this 
non-refundable application fee with or before its site approval application. 
(c) All required application fees shall be non-refundable, due and payable 
notwithstanding the withdrawal or abandonment of any site approval 
application. 
SENATE DOCKET, NO. 3157 FILED ON: 4/2/2024 
8 
 
(d) All fees in this section 205 CMR 16.10 shall be deposited 
into the Racing Development and Oversight Trust Fund. 
(1) Additional processing fees 
(a) Pursuant to 205 CMR 16.10(1), the applicant shall be 
responsible for paying to the Commission all costs incurred 
by the Commission, directly or indirectly, for processing and 
reviewing the site approval application. As required by the 
procedure established pursuant to 205 CMR 114.04(5), the 
applicant shall pay to or reimburse the Commission for all 
such review costs that exceed the initial application fee. 
(b) For purposes of 205 CMR 16.10, the costs for processing and 
review shall include, without limitation: 
(i) All fees for services, disbursements, out of pocket 
costs, allocated overhead, processing charges, 
administrative expenses, professional fees, and 
(ii) other costs directly or indirectly incurred by the 
Commission, including without limitation all such 
amounts incurred by the Commission to and through 
the Bureau, the Division, the Gaming Enforcement 
Unit, the Gaming Liquor Enforcement Unit, and any 
contract investigator. 
(c) The Commission in its discretion shall establish, and, post on 
its website, a schedule of hourly fees, wages, applicable 
fringe benefits, payroll taxes, overhead rates and other 
charges to be assessed by the Commission to applicants for 
in-house personnel, services and work of the Commission, the 
Bureau, the Division, the Gaming Enforcement Unit, and the 
Gaming Liquor Enforcement Unit. 
(d) The Commission shall assess to the applicant all other costs 
paid by or for the Commission, directly or indirectly, to any 
other person for conducting an investigation into an 
applicant, plus an appropriate percent for overhead, 
processing and administrative expenses. 
16.11 Interaction with Other Provisions of 205 CMR 
(0) The Commission shall not unreasonably withhold approval of 
elements of the licensee’s proposed simulcasting facility that are 
consistent with information disclosed to and approved by the 
Commission in accordance with 205 CMR 222, 238, or any other 
statute, regulation, license condition, or comparable source of 
authority administered by the Commission. 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
M.G.L. chs. 128C, § 2 and 128A § 9.
