SENATE………………………………………..No. 2824 
 
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts 
 
 
 
COMMUNICATION 
 
from 
 
MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
SUBMITTING PROPOSED REGULATIONS FOR 
 
HARNESS HORSE RACING 
205 CMR 3.00 
PARI-MUTUEL RULES FOR THOROUGHBRED RACING, 
HARNESS RACING, AND GREYHOUND RACING 
205 CMR 6.00 
 
(under the provisions of section 9B of Chapter 128A 
of the General Laws) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 30, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
May 30, 2024 
 
VIA FIRST CLASS MAIL 
and EMAIL: (Senate.clerk@ma.state.us) (michael.d.hurley@state.ma.us ) 
 
The Honorable Michael D. Hurley 
Senate Clerk 
Office of the Senate Clerk 
24 Beacon Street |Room 335- State House 
Boston, MA 02133 
 
Senate Clerk Hurley: 
 
Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 128A, § 9B, the Massachusetts Gaming Commission (“Commission”) hereby files 
205 CMR 3.00, specifically, 205 CMR 3.12: Judges, and 205 CMR 3.29: Medications and Prohibited 
Substances, and 205 CMR 6.00, specifically 205 CMR 6.24: Deposits, with the Clerk of the Senate. 
 
205 CMR 3.12 is being amended to address qualifying mile requirements of race horses; and to 
provide Racing Judges with broader discretion to impose penalties –consistent with the 
recommendations of the Association of Racing Commissioners International (A.R.C.I.).  
 
205 CMR 3.29 is being amended to clarify the discretion of racing stewards in crafting penalties 
for medication violations, and their ability to consider United States Trotting Association (USTA) 
records in addition to ARCI records.   
 
205 CMR 6.24 is being amended to mirror the statutory language more closely within G.L. c. 
128A, § 5C and eliminate any inconsistencies between the regulation and statute.   
 
These regulations are largely governed by M.G.L. c. 128A, § 9. A public hearing was held regarding 
these proposed amendments on May 21, 2024. If you have any questions or need additional information, 
please feel free to reach me at judith.young@massgaming.gov or (617) 979-8426. Thank you for your 
attention to this matter. 
 
 Respectfully submitted, 
 
Massachusetts Gaming Commission 
By: 
 
 
 
 
Judith A. Young, Esq. 
Associate General Counsel 
 
 
Enclosures 

205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
3.12: Judges 
(1) The Judges shall have the power to interpret 205 CMR 3.00 and to decide all questions not specifically covered by them, 
such decisions to be reported to the Commission within 24 hours. 
(2) In matters pertaining to racing, the orders of the Judges supersede the orders of the officers and directors of the 
Association. 
 
(3) The Judges shall have general supervision over owners, trainers, drivers, grooms and other persons attendant on horses, 
and also over all the other officials of the meeting. 
(4) Judges’ Authority Concerning Race Objections. 
(a) An objection to an incident alleged to have occurred during a race shall be received only when lodged with the 
Judges, by the owner, the authorized agent of the owner, the trainer or the driver of a horse engaged in the same race. 
(b) An objection following the completion of any race must be filed before the race results are declared official. 
(c) The Judges shall make all findings of fact as to all matters occurring during and incident to the completion of a race; 
shall determine all objections and inquiries, and shall determine the extent of disqualification, if any, of horses in the 
race. Such findings of fact and determinations shall be final and shall not be appealable. 
(d) In the case of disqualification the Judges shall immediately make public the reason for the disqualification and the 
same shall be announced over the public address system. 
 
(5) During each racing day the Judges of the meeting shall be at the office building on the grounds of the Association where 
the racing meeting is being held not later than one hour before post time of the first race of the day to exercise the authority 
and perform the duties imposed on the Judges by the Rules of Racing. 
(6) At least one Judge shall occupy the Judges’ Stand during the running of all qualifying races and non-wagering races. 
(7) The Judges shall require all horses not showing a satisfactory racing line during the previous 3045 days to go a qualifying 
mile in a race before the Judges. The Association may request a waiver of this requirement. 
(8) All questions pertaining to the conduct of the meeting shall be determined by a majority of the Judges. 
(9) No hearing shall be held on 205 CMR 3.00 following the last race of any day during the racing meeting, unless by special 
permission of the Commission. 205 CMR 3.12(8) shall not apply on the last day of any racing meeting. 
(10) The Judges shall occupy the Judges Stand, from the time the post parade is formed for each race until the race is made 
official, and their duty shall be to place and record five horses or as many more as they think proper in the order of their 
finish in each race. 
(11) The Judges shall properly display the numbers of the first four horses in each race in the order of their finish. 
(12) When the Judges differ in their placing the majority shall prevail. 
(13) The Judges shall make public their decision as promptly as possible. 
(14) If it is considered advisable to consult a picture from the finish camera, the Judges shall post, without waiting for a 
picture, such placements as are in their opinion unquestionable, and after consulting the picture, make the other placements. 
(15) The Judges may call for a picture from the photo-finish camera to aid them in arriving at a decision. However, in all 
cases the camera is merely an aid and the decision of the Judges shall be final. 
(16) In determining the places of the horses at the finish of a race, the Judges shall consider only the relative position of the 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
respective noses of such horses. 
(17) After the finish of the race all drivers shall report to the Judges’ Stand. The Judges shall not declare the race official until 
each driver has had an opportunity to file a protest as to what occurred in the race. 
(18) There shall be no alteration of placement after the sign “Official” has been purposely displayed, except as in provided in 
205 CMR 6.00: Pari-mutuel Rules for Horse Racing, Harness Horse Racing and Greyhound Racing. 
(19) The Judges shall each day file with the Commission a copy of the official placement of the first five horses in each race 
of that day and shall supply to the other officials such information in respect to the racing as the Association may require. 
 
(20) The Judges may suspend for no greater period than 180 days anyone whom they have authority to supervise, and/or they 
may impose a forfeiture., In the case of a finding of a violation of 205 CMR 3.29, the Judges shall consider the classification 
level of the violation as listed at the time of the violation in the Uniform Classification Guidelines for Foreign Substances as 
promulgated by the Association of Racing Commissioners International (ARCI) and impose penalties and disciplinary 
measures consistent with the recommendations contained therein.not exceeding $3,000.00. All such suspensions and 
forfeitures must be reported to the Commission. If the punishment to be imposed is not in the opinion of the Judges 
sufficient, they shall so report to the Commission. 
 
 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
 
205 CMR 3.00: M.G.L. c. 128A, § 9. 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
 
3.29: Medications and Prohibited Substances 
(1) Aggravating and Mitigating Factors. Upon a finding of a violation of 205 CMR 3.29, the judges shall 
consider the classification level of the violation as listed at the time of the violation in the Uniform 
Classification Guidelines for Foreign Substances as promulgated by the Association of Racing 
Commissioners International (ARCI) and impose penalties and disciplinary measures consistent with the 
recommendations contained therein. The judges shall also consult with the official veterinarian, laboratory 
director or other individuals to determine the seriousness of the laboratory finding or the medication 
violation. All medication and drug violations shall be investigated and reviewed on a case by case basis. 
Extenuating factors include, but are not limited to: 
(a) The past record of the trainer, veterinarian and owner in drug cases; 
 
(b) The potential of the drug(s) to influence a horse’s racing performance; 
(c) The legal availability of the drug; 
(d) Whether there is reason to believe the responsible party knew of the administration of the drug or 
intentionally administered the drug; 
(e) The steps taken by the trainer to safeguard the horse; 
(f) The probability of environmental contamination or inadvertent exposure due to human drug use; 
(g) The purse of the race; 
(h) Whether the drug found was one for which the horse was receiving a treatment as determined by 
the Medication Report Form; 
(i) Whether there was any suspicious betting pattern in the race; and 
(j) Whether the licensed trainer was acting under the advice of a licensed veterinarian. 
As a result of the investigation, there may be mitigating circumstances for which a lesser or no 
penalty is appropriate for the licensee and aggravating factors, which may increase the penalty 
beyond the minimum. 
(2) Penalties. 
(a) In issuing penalties against individuals found guilty of medication and drug violations, a regulatory 
distinction shall be made between the detection of therapeutic medications used routinely to treat 
racehorses and those drugs that have no reason to be found at any concentration in the test sample on 
race day. 
(b) If a licensed veterinarian is administering or prescribing a drug not listed in the ARCI Uniform 
Classification Guidelines for Foreign Substances, the identity of the drug shall be forwarded to the 
official veterinarian to be forwarded to the Racing Medication and Testing Consortium for 
classification. 
(c) Any drug or metabolite thereof found to be presenting a pre- or post-race sample which is not 
classified in the version of the ARCI Uniform Classification Guidelines for Foreign Substances in 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
effect at the time of the violation shall be assumed to be a ARCI Class 1 Drug and the trainer and 
owner shall be subject to those penalties as set forth in schedule “A” therein unless satisfactorily 
demonstrated otherwise by the Racing Medication and Testing Consortium, with a penalty category 
assigned. 
(d) Any licensee of the Commission, including veterinarians, found to be responsible for the improper 
or intentional administration of any drug resulting in a positive test may, after proper notice and 
hearing, be subject to the same penalties set forth for the licensed trainer. 
(e) Procedures shall be established to ensure that a licensed trainer is not able to benefit financially 
during the period for which the individual has been suspended. This includes, but is not limited to, 
ensuring that horses are not transferred to licensed family members. 
(f) Multiple positive tests for the same medication incurred by a trainer prior to delivery of official 
notice by the Commission may be treated as a single violation. In the case of a positive test indicating 
multiple substances found in a single post-race sample, the Stewards may treat each substance found 
as an individual violation, depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case. 
 
 
(2A) Multiple Medication Violations (MMV). A trainer who receives a penalty for a medication violation 
based upon a horse testing positive for a Class 1-5 medication with Penalty Class A-C, as provided in the 
most recent version of the ARCI Uniform Classification Guidelines for Foreign Substances, or similar 
state regulatory guidelines, shall be assigned points as follows: 
 
 
Penalty Class 
 
 
Points if Controlled 
Therapeutic Substance 
 
 
Points if Non-controlled 
Substance 
 
 
Class A 
 
 
N/A 
 
 
6 
 
 
Class B 
 
 
2 
 
 
4 
 
 
Class C 
 
 
½ for first violation with an 
additional ½ point for each 
additional violation within 365 
days1one for first violation 
with an additional ½ point for 
each additional violation 
within 365 days 
 
 
 
 
Class D 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
1 Points for NSAID violations only apply when the primary threshold of the NSAID is exceeded. Points 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
are not to be separately assigned for a stacking violation. 
 
If the Stewards or Commission determine that the violation is due to environmental contamination, 
they may assign lesser or no points against the trainer based upon the specific facts of the case. 
 
(a) The points assigned to a medication violation by the Stewards’ or Commission’s Ruling shall be 
included in the ARCI official database. The ARCI shall record points consistent with Section 13(a) 
including, when appropriate, a designation that points have been suspended for the medication 
violation. Points assigned by such regulatory ruling shall reflect, in the case of multiple positive tests 
as described in 205 CMR 6.29(3)(d), whether they constitute a single violation. The Stewards’ or 
Commission’s Ruling shall be posted on the official website of the Commission and within the official 
database of the Association of Racing Commissioners International. If an appeal is pending, that fact 
shall be noted in such Ruling. No points shall be applied until a final adjudication of the enforcement 
of any such violation. 
 
(b) A trainer’s cumulative points for violations in all racing jurisdictions shall be maintained by the 
ARCI. Once all appeals are waived or exhausted, the points shall immediately become part of the 
trainer’s official ARCI record and shall be considered by the Commission in its determination to 
subject the trainer to the mandatory enhanced penalties by the Stewards or Commission as provided 
in 205 CMR 3.00. 
(c) Multiple positive tests for the same medication incurred by a trainer prior to delivery of official 
notice by the Commission may be treated as a single violation. In the case of a positive test indicating 
multiple substances found in a single post-race sample, the Stewards may treat each substance found 
as an individual violation for which points will be assigned, depending upon the facts and 
circumstances of the case. 
(d) The official ARCI record and/or USTA record shall be used to advise the Stewards or Commission 
of a trainer’s past record of violations and cumulative points. Nothing in 205 CMR 3.00 shall be 
construed to confer upon a licensed trainer the right to appeal a violation for which all remedies have 
been exhausted or for which the appeal time has expired as provided by applicable law. 
(e) The Stewards or Commission shall consider all points for violations in all racing jurisdictions as 
contained in the trainer’s official ARCI record when determining whether the mandatory 
enhancements provided in 205 CMR 3.00 shall be imposed. 
 
(f) In addition to the penalty for the underlying offense, the following enhancements shall be imposed 
upon a licensed trainer based upon the cumulative points contained in his or her official ARCI record: 
 
 
Points 
 
 
Suspension in Days 
 
 
5-5.5 
 
 
15 to 30 
 
 
6-8.5 
 
30 to 60 
 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
 
9-10.5 
 
 
90 to 180 
 
 
11 or more 
 
 
180 to 360 
 
 
 
(g) MMV penalties are not a substitute for the current penalty system and are intended to be an 
additional uniform penalty when the licensee: 
1. Has had more than one medication violation for the relevant time period, and 
2. Exceeds the permissible number of points. 
 
(h) The Stewards and Commission shall consider aggravating and mitigating circumstances, including 
the trainer’s prior record for medication violations, when determining the appropriate penalty for the 
underlying offense. The MMP is intended to be a separate and additional penalty for a pattern of 
violations. 
1. The suspension periods as provided in Section 13(g) shall run consecutive to any suspension 
imposed for the underlying offense. 
2. The Stewards’ or Commission’s Ruling shall distinguish between the penalty for the underlying 
offense and any enhancement based upon a Steward or Commission review of the trainer’s 
cumulative points and regulatory record, which may be considered an aggravating factor in a case. 
 
3. Points shall expire as follows: 
 
 
Penalty Classification 
 
 
Time to Expire 
 
 
A 
 
 
three years 
 
 
B 
 
 
two years 
 
 
C 
 
 
one year 
 
 
 
In the case of a medication violation that results in a suspension, any points assessed expire on 
the anniversary date of the date the suspension is completed. 
(3) Medication Restrictions. 
 
 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
(a) A finding by the Commission approved laboratory of a prohibited drug, chemical or other 
substance in a test specimen of a horse is prima facie evidence that the prohibited drug, chemical or 
other substance was administered to the horse and, in the case of a post-race test, was present in the 
horse’s body while it was participating in a race. Prohibited substances include: 
 
1. Drugs or medications for which no acceptable threshold concentration has been established; 
2. Controlled therapeutic medications in excess of established threshold concentrations or 
administration within the restricted time period as set forth in the version of the ARCI Controlled 
Therapeutic Medication Schedule in effect at the time of the violation; 
3. Substances present in the horse in excess of concentrations at which such substances could 
occur naturally; and 
4. Substances foreign to a horse at concentrations that cause interference with testing procedures. 
(b) Except as otherwise provided by 205 CMR 3.00, a person may not administer or cause to be 
administered by any means to a horse a prohibited drug, medication, chemical or other substance, 
including any restricted medication pursuant to 205 CMR 3.00 during the 24-hour period before post 
time for the race in which the horse is entered. 
(4) Medical Labeling. 
(a) No person on association grounds where horses are lodged or kept, excluding licensed 
veterinarians, shall have in or upon association grounds which that person occupies or has the right to 
occupy, or in that person’s personal property or effects or vehicle in that person’s care, custody or 
control, a drug, medication, chemical, foreign substance or other substance that is prohibited in a horse 
on a race day unless the product is labeled in accordance with 205 CMR 3.29(4). 
(b) Any drug or medication which is used or kept on association grounds and which, by federal or 
state law, requires a prescription must have been validly prescribed by a duly licensed veterinarian, 
and in compliance with the applicable state statutes. All such allowable medications must have a 
prescription label which is securely attached and clearly ascribed to show the following: 
1. The name of the product; 
2. The name, address and telephone number of the veterinarian prescribing or dispensing the 
product; 
3. The name of each patient (horse) for whom the product is intended/prescribed; 
4. The dose, dosage, duration of treatment and expiration date of the prescribed/ dispensed 
product; and 
5. The name of the person (trainer) to whom the product was dispensed. 
(5) Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs). The use of one of three approved NSAIDs shall 
be permitted under the following conditions: 
(a) Not to exceed the following permitted serum or plasma threshold concentrations which are 
consistent with administration by a single intravenous injection at least 24 hours before the post time 
for the race in which the horse is entered: 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
1. Phenylbutazone. two micrograms per milliliter; 
2. Flunixin. 20 nanograms per milliliter; 
3. Ketoprofen. two nanograms per milliliter. 
(b) These or any other NSAID are prohibited to be administered within the 24 hours before post time 
for the race in which the horse is entered. 
(c) The presence of more than one of the three approved NSAIDs in the post-race serum or plasma 
sample is not permitted. 
1. A finding of phenylbutazone below a concentration of .5 microgram per milliliter of blood 
serum or plasma shall not constitute a violation of 205 CMR 3.29(5). 
2. A finding of flunixin below a concentration of three nanograms per milliliter of blood serum 
or plasma shall not constitute a violation of 205 CMR 3.29(5). 
(d) The use of all but one of the approved NSAIDs shall be discontinued at least 48 hours before the 
post time for the race in which the horse is entered. 
(e) The presence of any unapproved NSAID in the post-race serum or plasma sample is not permitted. 
(6) Furosemide. 
(a) In order for a horse to be placed on the Furosemide List the following process must be followed. 
1. After the horse’s licensed trainer and licensed veterinarian determine that it would be in the 
horse’s best interests to race with furosemide, the official veterinarian or his or her designee shall 
be notified, using the prescribed form, that the horse is to be put on the Furosemide List. 
2. The form must be received by the official veterinarian or his or her designee by the time of 
entry. 
3. A horse placed on the official Furosemide List must remain on that list unless the licensed 
trainer and licensed veterinarian submit a written request to remove the horse from the list. The 
request must be made to the official veterinarian or his or her designee, on the proper form, no 
later than the time of entry. 
4. After a horse has been removed from the Furosemide List, the horse may not be placed back 
on the list for a period of 60 calendar days unless it is determined to be detrimental to the welfare 
of the horse, in consultation with the official veterinarian. If a horse is removed from the official 
Furosemide List a second time in a 365-day period, the horse may not be placed back on the list 
for a period of 90 calendar days. 
5. Furosemide shall only be administered on association grounds. 
6. Furosemide shall be the only authorized bleeder medication. 
7. The use of furosemide shall not be permitted in two year olds. 
(b) The use of furosemide shall be permitted under the following circumstances on association 
grounds where a detention barn is not utilized: 
 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
 
1. Furosemide shall be administered by single intravenous injection no less than four hours prior 
to post time for the race for which the horse is entered. 
2. The furosemide dosage administered shall not exceed 500 mg. nor be less than 150 mg. 
3. After treatment, the horse shall be required by the Commission to remain in the proximity of 
its stall in the care, custody and control of its trainer or the trainer’s designated representative 
under general association and/or Commission security surveillance until called to the saddling 
paddock. 
(c) Test results must show a detectable concentration of the drug in the post-race serum, plasma or 
urine sample. 
1. The specific gravity of post-race urine samples may be measured to ensure that samples are 
sufficiently concentrated for proper chemical analysis. The specific gravity shall not be below 
1.010. If the specific gravity of the urine is found to be below 1.010 or if a urine sample is 
unavailable for testing, quantitation of furosemide in serum or plasma shall be performed; 
2. Quantitation of furosemide in serum or plasma shall be performed when the specific gravity of 
the corresponding urine sample is not measured or if measured below 1.010. Concentrations may 
not exceed 100 nanograms of furosemide per milliliter of serum or plasma. 
(d) A horse which has been placed on the Furosemide List in another jurisdiction pursuant to 205 
CMR 3.00 shall be placed on the Furosemide List in this jurisdiction. A notation on the horse’s 
electronic eligibility certificate of such shall suffice as evidence of being on a Furosemide List in 
another jurisdiction. 
(7) Bleeder List. 
(a) The official veterinarian shall maintain a Bleeder List of all horses, which have demonstrated 
external evidence of exercise induced pulmonary hemorrhage from one or both nostrils during or after 
a race or workout as observed by the official veterinarian. 
(b) Every confirmed bleeder, regardless of age, shall be placed on the Bleeder List and be ineligible 
to race for the minimum following time periods: 
1. First incident - 14 days; 
2. Second incident - 30 days; 
3. Third incident - 180 days; and 
4. Fourth incident - barred for racing lifetime. 
(c) For the purposes of counting the number of days a horse is ineligible to run, the day the horse bled 
externally is the first day of the recovery period. 
(d) The voluntary administration of furosemide without an external bleeding incident shall not subject 
the horse to the initial period of ineligibility as defined by 205 CMR 3.29(7). 
(e) A horse which has been placed on a Bleeder List in another jurisdiction pursuant to rules similar 
to 205 CMR 3.29(7) shall be placed on a Bleeder List in this jurisdiction. 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
 
 
(8) Androgenic-anabolic Steroids (AAS). 
(a) No AAS shall be permitted in test samples collected from racing horses except for residues of the 
major metabolite of nandrolone, and the naturally occurring substances boldenone and testosterone at 
concentrations less than the indicated thresholds. 
(b) Concentrations of these AAS shall not exceed the following plasma or serum thresholds for 
unchanged (i.e., not conjugated) substance or urine threshold concentrations (i.e., free drug or 
metabolite and drug or metabolite liberated from its conjugates): 
1. Boldenone: 15 ng/ml of total boldenone in urine of male horses other than geldings, or 25 pg/ml 
of boldenone in plasma or serum of all horses regardless of sex; 
2. Nandrolone: 1 ng/ml of total nandrolone in urine for fillies, mares, and geldings, or 45 ng/ml 
(as 5α-estrane-3β, 17α-diol)) in urine, in male horses other than geldings, or 25 pg/ml of 
nandrolone in plasma or serum for geldings, fillies, and mares. 
3. Testosterone: 
a. In Geldings. 20 ng/ml total testosterone in urine, or 25 pg/ml of testosterone in plasma or 
serum; and 
b. In Fillies and Mares. 55 ng/ml total testosterone in urine, or 25 pg/ml of testosterone in 
plasma or serum. 
(c) Any other anabolic steroids are prohibited in racing horses. 
(d) Post-race urine samples must have the sex of the horse identified to the laboratory. 
(9) Alkalinizing Substances. The use of agents that elevate the horse’s TCO2 or Base excess level above 
those existing naturally in the untreated horse at normal physiological concentrations is prohibited. 
(a) The following levels also apply to blood gas analysis: 
1. The regulatory threshold for TCO2 is 37.0 millimoles per liter of plasma/serum or a Base excess 
level of 10.0 millimoles; and 
2. The decision level to be used for the regulation of TCO2 is 37.0 millimoles per liter of 
plasma/serum plus the measurement uncertainty of the laboratory analyzing the sample or a Base 
excess level of 10.4 millimoles per liter of plasma/serum. 
(b)1. If the level of TCO2 is determined to exceed 37.0 millimoles per liter of plasma/ erum plus the 
laboratory’s measurement of uncertainty and the owner or trainer of the horse certifies in writing to 
the judges within 24 hours after the notification of the test results that the level is normal for that 
horse, the owner or trainer may request in writing that the horse be held in quarantine. If quarantine 
is requested, the licensed association shall make guarded quarantine available for that horse for a 
period of time to be determined by the steward or judges, but in no event for more than 72 hours. 
 
 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
2. The expense to maintain the quarantine shall be borne by the owner or trainer. 
3. During quarantine, the horse shall be retested periodically by the Commission veterinarian. 
4. The horse shall not be permitted to race during a quarantine period, but it may be exercised and 
trained at times prescribed by the licensed association and in a manner that allows monitoring of 
the horse by a Commission representative. 
5. During quarantine, the horse shall be fed only hay, oats, and water. 
6. If the Commission veterinarian is satisfied that the horse’s level of TCO2, as registered in the 
original test, is physiologically normal for that horse, the judges: 
a. Shall permit the horse to race; and 
b. May require repetition of the quarantine procedure established in 205 CMR 3.29(9)(b)1. 
through 6. to reestablish that the horse’s TCO2 level is physiologically normal. 
 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
205 CMR 3.00: M.G.L. c. 128A, § 9 
205 CMR: MASSACHUSETTS GAMING COMMISSION 
 
6.24: Deposits 
Deposits may be made in person or by mail, in cash or by check or negotiable order of withdrawal. The 
proceeds of a check may first need banker’s clearance. Holding periods will be determined by the 
association and advised to the account holder. An individual who has established a betting account with 
a racing meeting licensee may deposit money into said account through the use of a credit card or debit 
card issued by a federal or state-chartered bank and a racing meeting licensee may collect and deposit 
money received in such a manner at the licensee’s racetrack or through the telephone, Internet or other 
telecommunications media.No deposits may be made by credit or debit card, and no credit is allowed. No 
credit shall be extended to a betting account by a running horse, harness horse or dog racing meeting 
licensee. A receipt for the deposit must be issued to the account holder, but does not need to reflect the 
current account balance. 
 
 
REGULATORY AUTHORITY 
 
205 CMR 6.00: M.G.L. c. 128A and 128C.
