HOUSE . . . . . . . No. 4844
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts
______________________________________

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, July 9, 2024.
The committee on Ways and Means, to whom was referred the
message from Her Excellency the Governor recommending legislation
making appropriations for the fiscal year 2024 to provide for
supplementing certain existing appropriations and for certain other
activities and projects (House, No. 4496), reports, in part, recommending
that the accompanying bill (House, No. 4844) ought to pass.
For the committee,
AARON MICHLEWITZ.

FILED ON: 7/9/2024

HOUSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. 4844
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts
_______________

In the One Hundred and Ninety-Third General Court
(2023-2024)
_______________

An Act providing protections for reproductive or gender-affirming care location information.
Whereas, The deferred operation of this act would tend to defeat its purpose, which is to
forthwith provide protections for reproductive and gender-affirming care location information,
therefore it is hereby declared to be an emergency law, necessary for the immediate preservation
of the public convenience.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by the authority
of the same, as follows:

1
2

SECTION 1. The General Laws are hereby amended by inserting after chapter 93L the
following chapter:-

3

CHAPTER 93M.

4

REPRODUCTIVE OR GENDER-AFFIRMING CARE LOCATION INFORMATION

5

PRIVACY PROTECTIONS

6
7
8

Section 1. As used in this chapter, the following words shall, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise, have the following meanings:
“Application”, a software program that runs on the operating system of a device.

1 of 9

9

“Collect”, to buy, rent, receive, acquire, derive, obtain, infer, generate, create, receive or

10

otherwise access an individual’s reproductive or gender-affirming care location information.

11

“Consent”, a clear affirmative act that signifies an individual’s freely given, specific,

12

informed and unambiguous opt-in agreement. Consent shall not include: (i) agreement secured

13

without first providing to the individual a clear and conspicuous disclosure of any information

14

material to the consent, apart from any privacy policy, terms of service, terms of use, general

15

release, user agreement or other similar document; or (ii) agreement obtained through the use of

16

a user interface designed or manipulated with the substantial effect of subverting or impairing

17

user autonomy, decision making or choice.

18

“Covered entity”, any person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,

19

association or other group, however organized, and all agents of the covered entity, that: (i) does

20

business, produces or provides a service in the commonwealth; and (ii) collects, processes or

21

discloses or has the ability to collect, process or disclose an individual’s reproductive or gender-

22

affirming care location information. A covered entity shall not include: (1) a state or local

23

government agency, any court of the commonwealth or a clerk, judge or justice of the court; or

24

(2) an individual acting in a non-commercial context.

25

“Device”, a mobile telephone, as defined in section 1 of chapter 90, or any other

26

electronic device that is or may be carried by or on an individual and is capable of connecting to

27

a cellular, bluetooth or other wireless network; provided, that device shall include any hand-held

28

or other portable electronic equipment capable of providing data communication between 2 or

29

more persons, including, but not limited to, a mobile telephone, a text messaging device, a

30

paging device, a personal digital assistant, a laptop computer, electronic equipment that is

2 of 9

31

capable of playing a video game or digital video disk, equipment on which digital photographs

32

are taken or transmitted or any combination thereof, or equipment that is capable of visually

33

receiving a television broadcast.

34

“Disclose”, to make reproductive or gender-affirming care location information available

35

to a third party, including, but not limited to, by selling, renting, sharing, publishing, releasing,

36

transferring, disseminating, providing access to or otherwise communicating such reproductive

37

or gender-affirming care location information orally, in writing, electronically or by any other

38

means.

39

“Individual”, a natural person located in the commonwealth or who was located in the

40

commonwealth at the time that their reproductive or gender-affirming care location information

41

was collected, processed or disclosed.

42

“Location privacy policy”, policies, practices and procedures controlling a covered

43

entity’s collection, processing, management, storage, retention and deletion of reproductive or

44

gender-affirming care location information, as set forth in regulations promulgated by the

45

attorney general pursuant to section 4.

46
47

“Permissible purpose”, as described in subsection (a) of section 2 and any regulations
promulgated by the attorney general pursuant to section 4.

48

“Process”, to perform any action or set of actions on or with reproductive or gender-

49

affirming care location information, including, but not limited to, accessing, using, storing,

50

retaining, analyzing, creating, generating, aggregating, altering, correlating, operating on,

51

recording, modifying, organizing, structuring, disposing of, destroying, de-identifying or

3 of 9

52

otherwise manipulating reproductive or gender-affirming care location information. Process shall

53

not include disclosing reproductive or gender-affirming care location information.

54

“Public safety release of information”, response to an emergency service agency, an

55

emergency alert, a 911 communication or any other communication reporting an imminent threat

56

to human life.

57

“Reproductive or gender-affirming care location information”, information concerning

58

reproductive or gender-affirming health care services that: (i) is linked or easily linkable to an

59

individual; (ii) is derived from a device or from interactions between devices, with or without the

60

knowledge of the user and regardless of the technological method used; and (iii) pertains to or

61

directly or indirectly reveals the present or past geographical location of an individual or device

62

within the commonwealth with sufficient precision to identify street-level location information

63

within a range of 1,850 feet or less; provided, that reproductive or gender-affirming care location

64

information shall include any location information that could reasonably indicate an individual’s

65

attempt to acquire or receive reproductive or gender-affirming health care services or efforts to

66

research or obtain reproductive or gender-affirming health care services. Reproductive or gender-

67

affirming care location information shall not include: (1) location information identifiable or

68

derived solely from the visual content of a legally obtained image, including the location of the

69

device that captured such image or publicly posted words; and (2) information that meets the

70

definition of protected health information for purposes of the federal Health Insurance Portability

71

and Accountability Act of 1996 and any regulations promulgated thereunder.

72
73

“Reproductive or gender-affirming health care services”, all supplies, care and services of
a medical, behavioral health, mental health, surgical, psychiatric, therapeutic, diagnostic,

4 of 9

74

preventative, rehabilitative or supportive nature relating to: (i) the treatment of gender dysphoria;

75

or (ii) pregnancy, contraception, assisted reproduction, miscarriage management or the

76

termination of a pregnancy.

77

“Service feature”, a discrete aspect of a service provided by a covered entity or service

78

provider, including, but not limited to, real-time directions, real-time weather and identity

79

authentication.

80

“Service provider”, an individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,

81

association or other group, however organized, that collects, processes or transfers reproductive

82

or gender-affirming care location information for the sole purpose of, and only to the extent that

83

such service provider is, conducting business activities on behalf of, for the benefit of, at the

84

direction of or under contractual agreement with a covered entity.

85

“Third party”, any covered entity or person other than: (i) a covered entity or service

86

provider that collected or processed reproductive or gender-affirming care location information

87

in accordance with this chapter; or (ii) the individual to whom the reproductive or gender-

88

affirming care location information pertains; provided, however, that a third party shall not

89

include a government entity.

90

Section 2. (a) No covered entity or service provider shall collect or process an

91

individual’s reproductive or gender-affirming care location information; provided, however, that

92

a covered entity or service provider may collect or process an individual’s reproductive or

93

gender-affirming care location information if: (i) a covered entity or service provider provides

94

the individual with a copy of their location privacy policy; (ii) obtains consent from the

95

individual; provided, however, that clause (i) and (ii) shall not be required when the collection or
5 of 9

96

processing is done for the public safety release of information; and (iii) is consistent with 1 or

97

more of the following permissible purposes:

98

(A) provision of a product, service or service feature to the individual to whom the

99

reproductive or gender-affirming care location information pertains when that individual

100

requested the provision of such product, service or service feature by subscribing to, creating an

101

account or otherwise contracting with a covered entity;

102

(B) initiation, management, execution or completion of a financial or commercial

103

transaction or fulfill an order for a specific product or service requested by an individual to

104

whom the reproductive or gender-affirming care location information pertains, including any

105

associated routine administrative, operational and account-servicing activity such as billing,

106

shipping, delivery, storage and accounting;

107

(C) compliance with an obligation under federal or any state law; or

108

(D) public safety release of information.

109

(b) No covered entity or service provider that collects or processes reproductive or

110
111
112
113
114
115
116

gender-affirming care location information for a permissible purpose shall:
(i) collect more precise reproductive or gender-affirming care location information than
necessary to carry out the permissible purpose;
(ii) retain reproductive or gender-affirming care location information longer than
necessary to carry out the permissible purpose;
(iii) sell, rent, trade, gift or lease reproductive or gender-affirming care location
information to third parties;
6 of 9

117
118

(iv) derive or infer from reproductive or gender-affirming care location information any
data that is not necessary to carry out a permissible purpose; or

119

(v) disclose, cause to disclose or assist with or facilitate the disclosure of an individual’s

120

reproductive or gender-affirming care location information to a third party, unless such

121

disclosure is: (A) necessary to carry out the permissible purpose for which the reproductive or

122

gender-affirming care location information was collected; or (B) requested by the individual to

123

whom the reproductive or gender-affirming care location information pertains.

124

(c) No covered entity or service provider shall disclose an individual’s reproductive or

125

gender-affirming care location information to any federal, state or local government agency or

126

official unless: (i) the agency or official serves the covered entity or service provider with a valid

127

warrant or establishes the existence of exigent circumstances that make it impracticable to obtain

128

a warrant; (ii) disclosure is mandated under federal or any state law; or (iii) the individual

129

requests such disclosure.

130

Section 3. (a) A violation of this chapter or a regulation promulgated under this chapter

131

regarding an individual’s reproductive or gender-affirming care location information shall be

132

deemed an unfair or deceptive act or practice in the conduct of trade or commerce under chapter

133

93A.

134

(b) The attorney general may bring an action pursuant to section 4 of chapter 93A against

135

a covered entity or service provider to remedy violations of this chapter and for other relief that

136

may be appropriate.

137
138

Section 4. The attorney general shall promulgate regulations for the administration of this
chapter, including, but not limited to:
7 of 9

139

(i) determining minimum requirements for inclusion in a location privacy policy,

140

including, but not limited to: (A) reproductive or gender-affirming care location information that

141

is collected, processed or disclosed; (B) specific reproductive or gender-affirming care location

142

information that is disclosed or shared with a third party; (C) a list of the third parties that the

143

reproductive or gender-affirming care location information is disclosed to; (D) any updates to the

144

location privacy policy and notice to the individual; (E) if there are multiple permissible

145

purposes, a disclosure of each such purpose; and (F) posting on the covered entity or service

146

provider’s website and application the location privacy policy;

147
148
149

(ii) any limitations or restrictions on the use of targeted advertisements by a covered
entity or service provider;
(iii) requirements for consent by individuals to the collection or processing of their

150

reproductive or gender-affirming care location information, including, but not limited, to the

151

duration of consent, any situations where consent shall be obtained again if a covered entity or

152

service provider amends its location privacy policy and how consent may be revoked;

153
154

(iv) circumstances when reproductive or gender-affirming care location information shall
be permanently destroyed;

155

(v) prohibitions on adverse actions by a covered entity or service provider against an

156

individual because the individual exercised or refused to waive any rights under this chapter;

157
158
159

(vi) notice requirement for any disclosure of reproductive or gender-affirming care
location information pursuant to subsection (c) of section 2; and
(vii) any other regulations necessary for the implementation of this chapter.

8 of 9

160

SECTION 2. The attorney general shall promulgate regulations pursuant to section 4 of

161

chapter 93M, inserted by section 1, not later than 120 days after the effective date of this act.

162

SECTION 3. Section 1 shall take effect 1 year after the effective date of this act.

9 of 9

